Inside:  Better Business Accounts p. 32
Save on Summertime Staffing p. 38
Protect Your Digital Work p. 42
MAY/JUNE 2023 MAY/JUNE 2023 II VOLUME 40  VOLUME 40 II NUMBER 2 NUMBER 2
As funeral homes evolve into  
one-stop shops for families, florists  
are finding new ways to keep the  
sympathy sales coming.
WIN BACK  
SYMP A THY  
SALESATLANTA | BLDG 1, 18-E18     •     HIGH POINT | IHFC | H309     •      LAS VEGAS | C-124
ACCENTDECOR.COM    •     770.346.0707ACCENT DECOR
12
22MAY/JUNE  2023 MAY/JUNE  2023 II VOLUME 40  VOLUME 40 II NUMBER 2 NUMBER 2
24
WIN BACK SYMPATHY SALES
As funeral homes evolve into one-stop shops for families, 
florists are finding new ways to keep the sympathy sales 
coming and remain a funeral home’s florist of choice. 
32
BETTER BUSINESS ACCOUNTS
Florists are building back corporate work post-
COVID and finding that much has changed, 
from budgets to delivery addresses. 
38 
SAVE ON SUMMERTIME STAFFING 
After Mother’s Day, most flower shops start a six-monthCOVID and finding that much has changed, 
from budgets to delivery addresses. 
38 
SAVE ON SUMMERTIME STAFFING 
After Mother’s Day, most flower shops start a six-month 
stretch of non-holiday sales levels. Proper staffing can 
significantly reduce payroll and increase profit margins.
2 VIEWPOINT
4 WHAT INSPIRES US
4 MORE ONLINE
6 AD INDEX
8 MEMBER FORUM
10 SAF IN ACTION
12 HANDS ON
18 TALENT20 GROWTH
22 FRESH CHOICES
40 UP THE SUPPLY CHAIN
42 DIGITAL STRATEGY
44 BUSINESS OF DESIGN
46 NEW PRODUCTS
48  QUALITY
ATLANTA | BLDG 1, 18-E18     •     HIGH POINT | IHFC | H309     •      LAS VEGAS | C-124
ACCENTDECOR.COM    •     770.346.0707ACCENT DECOR
COVER PHOTO COURTESY OF PENNY'S BY PLAZA FLOWERSViewpoint  BY ART CONFORTI, PFCI
THE FLORAL BUSINESS AUTHORITY 
MAY /JUNE 2023 | VOLUME 40 | NUMBER 2
AMANDA JEDLINSKY EDITOR IN CHIEF 
AJEDLINSKY@SAFNOW.ORG
SHEILA S. SANTIAGO DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT 
SSANTIAGO@SAFNOW.ORG
KATIE HENDRICK VINCENT SENIOR CONTRIBUTING EDITOR 
KVINCENT@SAFNOW.ORGAMANDA JEDLINSKY EDITOR IN CHIEF 
AJEDLINSKY@SAFNOW.ORG
SHEILA S. SANTIAGO DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT 
SSANTIAGO@SAFNOW.ORG
KATIE HENDRICK VINCENT SENIOR CONTRIBUTING EDITOR 
KVINCENT@SAFNOW.ORG
DESIGN AND PRODUCTION 
CONTENT WORX
PUBLISHING ADVISERS
KATE F. PENN, SAF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER  
KATIE P. BUTLER, SAF SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT
EDITORIAL OFFICES
SOCIETY OF AMERICAN FLORISTS 
1001 NORTH FAIRFAX, SUITE 201, ALEXANDRIA, VA 22314-3406 
(703) 836-8700 
WWW.SAFNOW.ORG
ADVERTISING SALES
SHEILA SANTIAGO 
SSANTIAGO@SAFNOW.ORG 
(703) 838-5225
FLORAL MANAGEMENT (ISSN 1067-4772) (USPS-936-400) IS 
PUBLISHED BIMONTHLY BY THE SOCIETY OF AMERICAN FLORISTS 
(SAF), THE ASSOCIATION THAT PROVIDES MARKETING, BUSINESS 
AND GOVERNMENT SERVICES FOR THE ENTIRE FLORICULTURE 
INDUSTRY. STATEMENTS OF FACT OR OPINION IN FLORAL 
MANAGEMENT ARE THOSE OF THE AUTHORS AND MAY NOT 
REFLECT THE OFFICIAL POLICY OF THE SOCIETY OF AMERICAN 
FLORISTS. PERIODICALS POSTAGE IS PAID AT ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIAMANAGEMENT ARE THOSE OF THE AUTHORS AND MAY NOT 
REFLECT THE OFFICIAL POLICY OF THE SOCIETY OF AMERICAN 
FLORISTS. PERIODICALS POSTAGE IS PAID AT ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA 
22314-3406 AND ADDITIONAL MAILING OFFICES. ALL MATERIAL IN 
THIS MAGAZINE IS COPYRIGHTED 2011 BY SOCIETY OF AMERICAN 
FLORISTS. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. $25 OF SAF MEMBERSHIP DUES 
REPRESENTS A MEMBER’S SUBSCRIPTION TO THIS PUBLICATION. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS FOR NON-MEMBERS ARE AVAILABLE FOR $59 PER 
YEAR. SINGLE COPIES: $4. MATERIALS MAY NOT BE REPRODUCED 
WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION. 
POSTMASTER
SEND CHANGE OF ADDRESS TO FLORAL MANAGEMENT,  
1001 NORTH FAIRFAX, SUITE 201, ALEXANDRIA, VA 22314-3406. 
PUBLICATIONS MAIL AGREEMENT #40589029. CANADIAN RETURN 
MAIL ADDRESS: STATION A P. O. BOX 54, WINDSOR, ON N9A 6J5.  
E-MAIL: CPCRETURNS@WDSMAIL.COM.
INSTRUCTION TO CONTRIBUTORS
FLORAL MANAGEMENT WELCOMES ARTICLES AND PRESS RELEASES 
TO BE SUBMITTED FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. SEND TO: FMEDITOR@E-MAIL: CPCRETURNS@WDSMAIL.COM.
INSTRUCTION TO CONTRIBUTORS
FLORAL MANAGEMENT WELCOMES ARTICLES AND PRESS RELEASES 
TO BE SUBMITTED FOR POSSIBLE PUBLICATION. SEND TO: FMEDITOR@
SAFNOW.ORG. ANY UNSOLICITED MATERIALS SENT, INCLUDING 
PHOTOGRAPHS, WILL NOT BE RETURNED UNLESS REQUESTED. FLORAL 
MANAGEMENT IS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR THE LOSS OF PHOTOGRAPHS 
OR ANY OTHER MATERIALS SENT.
FLORAL MANAGEMENT IS A MEMBER BENEFIT OF THE  
SOCIETY OF AMERICAN FLORISTS. WWW.SAFNOW.ORG
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
WE WELCOME YOUR FEEDBACK ON THE MAGAZINE. PLEASE SEND 
YOUR OPINIONS AND SUGGESTIONS TO: FMEDITOR@SAFNOW.ORG
OUR MISSION: FLORAL MANAGEMENT STRIVES TO GIVE READERS 
PRACTICAL, EASILY ACCESSIBLE INFORMATION ON OPERATING AN 
EFFECTIVE AND PROFITABLE FLORAL BUSINESS. ARTICLES ADDRESS 
A WIDE RANGE OF BUSINESS MANAGEMENT TOPICS, INCLUDING 
MARKETING AND ADVERTISING STRATEGIES, TECHNOLOGY, 
PERSONNEL AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AS WELL AS FRESH 
PRODUCT, SUPPLY AND ECONOMIC TRENDS.ON COURTING YOUR CUSTOMERSMARKETING AND ADVERTISING STRATEGIES, TECHNOLOGY, 
PERSONNEL AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AS WELL AS FRESH 
PRODUCT, SUPPLY AND ECONOMIC TRENDS.ON COURTING YOUR CUSTOMERS
> Are you leaving money on the table 
with your wedding customers?
First, you have to ask yourself: Do 
you see those couples as one-time cus -
tomers? You shouldn’t, and here’s why. 
Those customers sought you out 
for your skills, knowledge, service, and 
access to quality and specialty products. 
While event work offers a tremendous 
opportunity for you to display how well 
a florist can fulfill customers’ needs, it 
also offers more than just a one-time 
interaction. Events are opportunities for 
you to build trust and appreciation, and 
most importantly, a lifelong customer. 
“Wow” and impress your wedding cus -
tomers so that they seek you out for all 
their flower needs.
But all too often, after a couple says, 
“I do,” the florist’s role is over. All the 
efforts to market your wedding servicestomers so that they seek you out for all 
their flower needs.
But all too often, after a couple says, 
“I do,” the florist’s role is over. All the 
efforts to market your wedding services 
and please the couple come to an end. 
Don’t waste your efforts! Get those 
customers on your email list and follow 
up with them after the wedding. In fact, 
I recommend simply sending a $50 or 
$100 gift card to the couple to celebrate 
their first anniversary with flowers. They 
can reflect on their beautiful wedding 
day flowers with a similar arrangement 
for their first anniversary, on you!
Mark your calendar and take notes 
of the flowers used at the wedding. Call ahead of time 
to remind them 
of the gift card 
opportunity, 
and when you 
do, assist in the 
selection or offer 
to use some of the 
flowers that were 
in the wedding. This is great relationship 
building.
You can also send a gift card as a 
thank you, or a postcard. Just don’t let 
that anniversary slip away. By commem -flowers that were 
in the wedding. This is great relationship 
building.
You can also send a gift card as a 
thank you, or a postcard. Just don’t let 
that anniversary slip away. By commem -
orating the first anniversary, you start 
the pattern of sending flowers on their 
anniversary. This keeps flowers — and 
your business — top of mind.
Remember to record the couple’s 
birthdays, too. You can email the 
spouse a birthday reminder. You want to 
become the concierge, but you have to 
initiate the effort. 
Plant the seeds for your future and 
watch your business grow! 
Art Conforti, PFCI, is president of the 
floral marketing company Bloomerang 
Solutions, a motivational speaker, and 
has more than 35 years of experience in 
the floral industry. 
2 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGWhat Inspires Us
More Online 
help customers  celebrate  summer  
In addition to a social calendar, images and 
suggested captions for Mother’s Day, SAF’sMore Online 
help customers  celebrate  summer  
In addition to a social calendar, images and 
suggested captions for Mother’s Day, SAF’s 
library of social media resources also boasts 
graphics and banners to encourage your 
customers to celebrate prom, graduation, 
Memorial Day, Pride Month and Father’s Day with 
flowers. safnow.org/summer 
assess  your holiday  performance
Watch this webinar after Mother’s Day and hear 
from floral financial expert Derrick Myers, CPA, 
CFP, PFCI, about how you and your staff can 
assess holiday performance to ensure an even 
smoother, more profitable holiday next year. This 
hourlong webinar on SAF’s Floral Education Hub 
is available to watch on demand. safnow.org/
ondemand
determine  your shop ’s value
Whether you are ready to sell your business, 
purchase a business, buy out a partner or conduct 
an estate valuation, you’ll need to determine 
your shop’s value. In this 30-minute, on-demand 
webinar on SAF’s Floral Education Hub, Paulpurchase a business, buy out a partner or conduct 
an estate valuation, you’ll need to determine 
your shop’s value. In this 30-minute, on-demand 
webinar on SAF’s Floral Education Hub, Paul 
Goodman, MBA, PFCI, a former CPA and the 
founder of Floral Finance Business Services, walks 
you through the necessary steps to find what your 
business is worth. safnow.org/ondemand
get tips from saf’s  
virtual  idea exchange
Mark your calendar to join your peers for these 
interactive, monthly virtual gatherings to discuss 
best practices. On Wednesday, May 3 at 2 p.m. 
ET, floral pros will gather to share corporate 
account hacks. On Wednesday, June 14 at 2 
p.m. ET, the Idea Exchange will focus on gaining 
sympathy sales. safnow.org/events
REINVENTING RELIABLE REVENUE
> If you’ve been in the industry for 
a while, you know the flow of sym -
pathy work has changed. For many 
florists, gone are the days of grieving 
families arriving at their shop to talk 
about funeral flower arrangements.a while, you know the flow of sym -
pathy work has changed. For many 
florists, gone are the days of grieving 
families arriving at their shop to talk 
about funeral flower arrangements. 
Many florists are finding that funeral 
homes are becoming one-stop shops, 
offering families everything from 
cemetery plots to memorial gifts — 
and yes, flowers. This new model has 
challenged the way florists are doing 
business — and their profit margins. 
In our cover story (p. 24), we talked 
with florists about the change, how 
they navigate negotiating commis -
sions, and what they do to keep 
their business in good standing with 
funeral home directors. The story 
also offers strategies to tackle the 
perennial challenge of the “in lieu of 
flowers” wording used in obituaries. 
Sympathy work isn’t the only type of business that has significantly changed. 
Florists’ business-to-business accounts went through dramatic changes duringflowers” wording used in obituaries. 
Sympathy work isn’t the only type of business that has significantly changed. 
Florists’ business-to-business accounts went through dramatic changes during 
the pandemic when many offices closed. In our feature story, “Better Business 
Accounts” (p. 32), we explore how corporate accounts changed and how florists 
reinvented their business-to-business work.
Imagine discovering that the pictures you’d taken of your original arrange -
ments for your website had been used by other flower shops. That’s what 
happened to one florist, who made the discovery while doing a reverse Google 
image search. She was successful in getting the other businesses to take down 
her photos, but it raised a lot of questions: Who owns the photos? What do you 
do if your photos are used without permission? You’ll find the answers in the 
Digital Strategy column on page 42. 
Don’t forget that the Society of American Florists’ 29th annual Marketer ofdo if your photos are used without permission? You’ll find the answers in the 
Digital Strategy column on page 42. 
Don’t forget that the Society of American Florists’ 29th annual Marketer of 
the Year contest is accepting entries until May 31. This contest recognizes original 
and successful marketing strategies by any business in the floral industry in the 
past five years. The winner, who will be revealed at SAF Phoenix 2023, receives a 
$5,000 cash prize, sponsored by Design Master, a division of Smithers-Oasis, and 
will appear on the cover of the September/October issue of Floral Management. 
Thanks for reading!
Amanda Jedlinsky
Editor in Chief
ajedlinsky@safnow.org
4 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG6 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGAd Index
FEATURED 
ADVERTISERS  
 Accent Decor  IFC 
 AccentDecor.com 
 Alexandra Farms  41 
 AlexandraFarms.com 
 CalFlowers  47 
 cafgs.org
 Classico Garland Maker  17 
 ClassicoGarlandMaker.comFEATURED 
ADVERTISERS  
 Accent Decor  IFC 
 AccentDecor.com 
 Alexandra Farms  41 
 AlexandraFarms.com 
 CalFlowers  47 
 cafgs.org
 Classico Garland Maker  17 
 ClassicoGarlandMaker.com
 Deliflor Chrysanten  37 
 DeliFlor.com
 Details Flowers  19 
 DetailsFlowers.com
 Flower Shop Network 7 
 FlowerShopNetwork.com
 FTD  BC 
 FTDi.com/NEWFTD 
 gotFlowers?  15 
 gotFlowers.com
 PhotoFlorals  43 
 PhotoFlorals.com  
 Smithers-Oasis  5 
 OasisFloralProducts.com  
 Sun Valley Floral Farms 21 
 tsvg.com
 Syndicate Sales 9, 30-31  
 SyndicateSales.com  
 TeamFloral  3 
 TeamFloral.com  
 Teleflora  IBC 
 MyTeleflora.com
 That Flower Feeling 47 
 ThatFlowerFeeling.orgPredict Sales, Manage 
Costs, Control Wages, 
Improve Profit Margins!
SAF’s Forecasting Your
Future Course Series
Presented by Manny and Clara Gonzales
Course 1: Sales Forecasting
Course 2: Cost of Goods Sold
Course 3: Wage Control
Step-by-step instructions, downloadable 
spreadsheets, and real-time instructions toCourse 1: Sales Forecasting
Course 2: Cost of Goods Sold
Course 3: Wage Control
Step-by-step instructions, downloadable 
spreadsheets, and real-time instructions to 
accurately forecast sales, manage costs of 
goods sold and control wages.
To learn more, 
and register
SCAN TO LEARN MOREFLORALsponsored by Flower Shop Network and JacobsonSAF 1/hyphen.caseDAY PROFIT BLAST
BOSTON, MA  /bullet.case  SUN, JULY 23
websites  /bullet.case  google services  /bullet.case  email marketing   /bullet.case   network of 7,000+
sending & receiving  /bullet.case  fsnflorists.com  /bullet.case  800.858.9925 
Celebrating Life Through Design
Patience Pickner, AAF, AIFD, PFCI
Online Reputation is the New SEO
Greg Peck, Flower Shop Network and FGmarket
Extraordinary Service in 
Your Shop Every Day
Sam Bowles, FSC, Flower Shop Network and 
Allen’s Flowers and Plants, San Diego, CAYou’ll learn:
/bullet.case Latest in sympathy design styles, trends, and productsYour Shop Every Day
Sam Bowles, FSC, Flower Shop Network and 
Allen’s Flowers and Plants, San Diego, CAYou’ll learn:
/bullet.case Latest in sympathy design styles, trends, and products 
/bullet.case How to be creative in sympathy design
/bullet.case Alternative foundations for sympathy work
You’ll learn:
/bullet.case How to manage Google reviews to increase online reputation 
/bullet.case How to leverage customer questions to become an 
    online authority
/bullet.case How to protect your brand's digital footprint
You’ll learn:
/bullet.case Effective language to put buyer and seller at ease 
/bullet.case Simple ways to engage customers on the ﬂoor
/bullet.case Follow up techniques to ensure customers’ satisfactionSAF Member Forum
PUMP IT UP
> As inflation threatens profit margins, 
florists are finding ways to increase their 
average order values beyond raising 
prices. In a recent survey by the Society 
of American Florists, nearly 74 percent 
of florists reported that focusing onaverage order values beyond raising 
prices. In a recent survey by the Society 
of American Florists, nearly 74 percent 
of florists reported that focusing on 
customer service, marketing and sales 
techniques (as well as raising prices) 
contributed to a higher order value in 
2022 than in 2021. Here’s what they had 
to say about their tactics. 
“We are offering more compact designs; 
elegant and sophisticated designs — not 
the conventional.”
Valerie Lee , J. Miller Flowers,  
Oakland, California
“We added a tip option to online order -
ing. I have been amazed at the money 
some people tip! I anticipated $5, maybe 
$10, but we’ve seen $20 plus tips regu -
larly and $35 to $50 are not uncommon. 
And, they are still buying the same style 
level of bouquets.”
Regina Cannon Treml , Belladonna 
Florist, Eden Prairie, Minnesota
“We put a minimum dollar value for deliv -
ery above $75. Also, we are making sure to 
offer service, unique finishing touches andRegina Cannon Treml , Belladonna 
Florist, Eden Prairie, Minnesota
“We put a minimum dollar value for deliv -
ery above $75. Also, we are making sure to 
offer service, unique finishing touches and 
value on any item that leaves our store.”
Polly Klein , Polly’s Petals,  
Lake Bluff, Illinois
“We increased our prices and continued 
to keep our level of customer service and 
product at a high level. Customers pay 
for service and nice product.”
Carma White , Four Seasons Flowers  
& Plants, San Diego, California
“We improved up sales training and 
earned a greater share of the market 
with great customer service! Our team 
is excellent!”
Kimberly Gregory , Carlsbad Floral  
and Gifts, Carlsbad, New Mexico
“We increased prices, but we are also 
offering a wider variety of price points 
— including a really large arrangement 
— on the website and over the phone.”
Nate Golter , Longmont Florist, 
Longmont, Colorado  SAF’s 29th 
Annual 
Marketer 
of the Year 
Contest— including a really large arrangement 
— on the website and over the phone.”
Nate Golter , Longmont Florist, 
Longmont, Colorado  SAF’s 29th 
Annual 
Marketer 
of the Year 
Contest
Enter SAF’s 29th Annual 
Marketer of the Year 
contest sponsored  by 
Design Master, a division 
of Smithers Oasis 
Winners receive $5,000 and will be featured 
on the cover of the September/October issue 
of Floral Management magazine. 
What makes a winner? 
Judges look for innovative and successful 
marketing eﬀ  orts. It can be a single 
campaign, or a series of promotional and 
advertising eﬀ  orts over the course of a year 
or more.
Enter Today!  
Submit your marketing campaign online by 
May 31. To submit your application and view 
contest criteria visit: Entry 
deadline: 
May 31, 
2023
Questions?   
email 
sbrady@safnow.org 
safnow.org/marketeroftheyear2022 winner, Ryan Black 
of Jet Fresh Flower 
Distributors
Fresh A 
Take
Take
Take
Jet Fresh Flower Distributors’ 
unconventional marketingemail 
sbrady@safnow.org 
safnow.org/marketeroftheyear2022 winner, Ryan Black 
of Jet Fresh Flower 
Distributors
Fresh A 
Take
Take
Take
Jet Fresh Flower Distributors’ 
unconventional marketing 
grew the small company into 
an internationally recognized brand, 
earning SAF’s Marketer of the Year award.
Inside:  Reward Loyal Customers p. 18
Cut Expenses in Key Areas p. 36
Work With Social Influencers p. 42
SEPT/OCT 2022 SEPT/OCT 2022 II VOLUME 39  VOLUME 39 II NUMBER 4 NUMBER 4
8 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGMODERN FLORISTSYMPATHY SUPPLIES FOR THE
Shop our Sympathy Products on SyndicateSales.com
FEATURES & BENEFITS:
100 pages of tribute design • 40 pages of floral recipes
10 pages of product index  • Large feature images
Categorized by color and category
Construction material list and floral recipe for every piece
Printed on plastic pages using UV ink for a near waterproof constructionCategorized by color and category
Construction material list and floral recipe for every piece
Printed on plastic pages using UV ink for a near waterproof construction
Clear spiral binding to make it easy to lay flatSympathy Styling Book • #1012-06-00
Designed not only as a selection book 
for grieving loved ones, but a recipe 
guide for the modern florist. Over 100 
pages of tasteful tribute designs with 
40 pages of floral recipes. 
SAF in Action BY AMANDA JEDLINSKY
FLORAL PROS CONVERGE IN WASHINGTON 
D.C. TO ADVOCATE FOR INDUSTRY
> Growers, wholesalers, retail florists and others with ties to the industry met with 
leaders and staffers of 70 congressional offices in Washington, D.C., in March during 
the Society of American Florists’ 43rd annual Congressional Action Days. There, they 
highlighted the issues affecting their businesses — and how Congress can help.
Attendees talked with legislators and their staffs about the need to fund flori -highlighted the issues affecting their businesses — and how Congress can help.
Attendees talked with legislators and their staffs about the need to fund flori -
culture research, reform agricultural labor, provide access to duty-free flowers, and 
renew the Farm Bill, which provides funding for innovations, research and disaster 
relief for specialty crops.
“Our legislators need to hear about the issues affecting the floral industry,” 
SAF President Michelle Castellano Keeler, AAF, said. “It is up to us to bring these 
issues to Washington and educate our elected leaders about how they could help 
improve our industry.” 
Sherry Grimes-Jenkins (center) of EMY Custom 
Flowers in Mahopac, New York ,and Ryan Alders 
(right) of Alders Wholesale Florist in Campbell 
Hall, New York, speak with legislative aide.
FJ Trzuskowski (center left) of Continental 
Floral Greens in Belfair, Washington, and Martin 
Meskers, AAF (center right), of Oregon Flowers inHall, New York, speak with legislative aide.
FJ Trzuskowski (center left) of Continental 
Floral Greens in Belfair, Washington, and Martin 
Meskers, AAF (center right), of Oregon Flowers in 
Aurora, Oregon, speak with congressional aides. 
At left: Stacie Lee Banks, AAF, of Lee’s Flower 
and Card Shop in Washington, D.C.; Chris 
Drummond, AAF, PFCI, of Penny’s by Plaza 
Flowers in Philadelphia; Helena Polites of Polites 
Florist in Upper Darby, Pennsylvania; Tim Farrell, 
AAF, AIFD, PFCI, of Farrell’s Florist in Drexel 
Hill, Pennsylvania; and Samarah Banks, also of 
Lee’s Flower and Card Shop, on their way to an 
appointment with a representative on Capitol Hill.
Fernando Ortega of Jet Fresh Flower Distributors in Miami; Cameron Pappas, AAF, of Norton’s Florist 
in Birmingham, Alabama; Oscar Fernandez of Equiflor-Rio Roses in Doral, Florida; Chris Norwood, AAF, 
AIFD, PFCI of Tipton & Hurst in Little Rock, Arkansas; and Jodi McShan, AAF, AIFD, PFCI, of McShanAIFD, PFCI of Tipton & Hurst in Little Rock, Arkansas; and Jodi McShan, AAF, AIFD, PFCI, of McShan 
Florist in Dallas. "I love the excitement of 
being on the Hill and the 
overwhelmingly positive 
response the members 
of Congress have for our 
industry. Flowers are truly 
a bipartisan issue and they 
want to support us."
— Frank Arnosky,  
Texas Specialty Cut Flowers, 
Wimberley, Texas
10 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGNEW AWARD TO 
HONOR NEXT GEN 
FLORAL PROS
> The Society of American Florists has 
created a new award to celebrate out -
standing Next Gen floral professionals 
for their professional achievements and 
commitment to the industry.
The Next Gen Rising Star Award 
honors forward-thinking young 
professionals who demonstrate 
creativity, innovation, tenacity and 
leadership in their work and the potential 
to make a positive impact on the floral 
industry.
“The Next Gen Rising Star Award 
highlights those in the industry that areleadership in their work and the potential 
to make a positive impact on the floral 
industry.
“The Next Gen Rising Star Award 
highlights those in the industry that are 
showing courage in their innovations, 
and finding artistry in abstract thinking,” 
says Renee Tucci, AAF, AIFD, PFCI, who 
sits on SAF’s awards committee  and 
helped develop the award. “This kind of 
growth is exactly what our young leaders 
should be doing to advance design 
and product development in floristry. 
Bringing attention to these individuals 
will only encourage others to do the 
same, which will be a win for all!”
The winner of this year’s Next Gen 
Rising Star Award will be announced at 
SAF Phoenix 2023 , SAF’s 138th annual 
convention in Scottsdale, Arizona.
The award builds on the work SAF 
has been doing to cultivate the next gen -
eration, a vital initiative for the future of 
the floral industry. Last year, SAF held 
its inaugural Next Gen LIVE! event in 
Miami for floral pros in all segments 45eration, a vital initiative for the future of 
the floral industry. Last year, SAF held 
its inaugural Next Gen LIVE! event in 
Miami for floral pros in all segments 45 
years old and younger. This year’s Next 
Gen LIVE! event, June 11-13 in Miami, will 
feature educational sessions and two 
tour options: a behind the scenes look at 
a few progressive floral retail operations 
or importing and distribution facilities at 
the Miami International Airport.
Know a young professional in any 
segment who represents a promising 
future for the industry? Nominate them 
at safnow.org by June 30. 
Amanda Jedlinsky  is the senior content 
strategist for the Society of American 
Florists and editor in chief of Floral 
Management. 
Tim Farrell, AAF, AIFD, PFCI, of Farrell’s Florist in Drexel Hill, Pennsylvania; Samarah Banks and Stacie 
Lee Banks, AAF, both of Lee’s Flower and Card Shop Washington, D.C.; Helena Polites of PolitesLee Banks, AAF, both of Lee’s Flower and Card Shop Washington, D.C.; Helena Polites of Polites 
Florist in Upper Darby, Pennsylvania; and Chris Drummond, AAF, PFCI, of Penny’s by Plaza Flowers in 
Philadelphia.
Dave Legge of Denver Wholesale Florists in Aurora, Colorado, and Lacee and Lenzee Bilke, AIFD, of 
Madeline’s Flower Shop in Edmond, Oklahoma.
Nicholas Chang of Rosaprima in Miami; Andres Guzman and Juan Guaqueta of Asocolflores in Bogotá, 
Colombia; Corrine Heck, PFCI, of Details Flowers Software in Ormond Beach, Florida; Fernando Ortega 
of Jet Fresh Flower Distributors in Miami; Sofia Herrera of Jardines De Los Andes in Madrid, Colombia; 
Scott Blumenthal of FTD in Downers Grove, Illinois; Zoë Gallina, AAF, of Botanica International Decor 
& Design Studio in Tampa, Florida; David Armellini of Armellini Logistics in Palm City, Florida; Oscar 
Fernandez of Equiflor-Rio Roses in Doral, Florida; and Austin Bryant of Heart of Florida Greenhouses in 
Zolfo Springs, Florida.Fernandez of Equiflor-Rio Roses in Doral, Florida; and Austin Bryant of Heart of Florida Greenhouses in 
Zolfo Springs, Florida.
  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 11Hands On BY AMANDA JEDLINSKY
> Want to make the biggest impact showcasing your wedding work, whether for the 
event or at bridal shows and open houses at venues? To really impress your client 
with the grandeur of your work, you need to transform the space.
That was the impetus of renowned Colombian florist David Vasquez’s workshop 
last fall in Medellín, Colombia, where he hosted dozens of florists from around the 
world at a popular wedding venue and trained them how to transform an empty space 
into a grand wedding reception. The attendees learned how to drape fabrics and 
florals from the ceiling, create oversized floral displays for dining tables, construct a 
wall of flowers at the bar, customize flooring and more. 
Throughout the three-day workshop, sponsored by Asocolflores, the Associationwall of flowers at the bar, customize flooring and more. 
Throughout the three-day workshop, sponsored by Asocolflores, the Association 
of Colombian Flower Exporters, Vasquez offered this advice to florists to create an 
unforgettable environment:
	■Get to know the space. Where are the electrical outlets? Where can you 
hook installations, and what is the weight capacity? How will lighting 
affect the look of your designs? Vasquez also recommends taking 
measurements, and accounting for how much space is needed for 
tables, chairs, and even for staff and guests to pass through easily.
	■Establish good relationships with vendors for the items you don’t 
have, such as furniture, dinnerware, linens and more. 
	■Seek out top-quality flowers that will arrive with enough time for them 
to mature to their peak. Be innovative with your designs and don’t 
provide the same style for every client; let their style drive your designs.to mature to their peak. Be innovative with your designs and don’t 
provide the same style for every client; let their style drive your designs. 
“Have a vision. Innovate. Don’t copy what everyone else does.” 
	■Set boundaries. Don’t become a hostage of the client’s 
time or ideas. Earn the client’s trust to give yourself some 
room to be creative and build on their ideas. 
Amanda Jedlinsky  is the senior content strategist for the Society of American 
Florists and editor in chief of Floral Management. SNAPSHOT
Transform Spaces to 
‘Wow’ Wedding Clients
12 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 13Hands On BY JENNIFER SPERRY
> When it comes to promoting your 
wedding and event services, social 
media is a powerful tool. Think of all your 
channels as an evolving portfolio that 
clients can view, bookmark, and share in 
real time. 
But there’s more to promoting your 
event capabilities than just posting beau -channels as an evolving portfolio that 
clients can view, bookmark, and share in 
real time. 
But there’s more to promoting your 
event capabilities than just posting beau -
tiful images of arrangements. According 
to floral designer Yumiko Fletcher, 
owner and creative director at Hana 
Floral Design (@hanafloral) in coastal 
Connecticut, it’s equally important to 
show the “who” behind your brand.
“Whether it’s a single person or a 
team of pros, followers want to see who 
they may be hiring for their big day,” 
asserts Fletcher, whose organic creations 
grace luxury weddings across southern 
New England and New York. “They want 
to know something personal about you, 
whether it’s something close to your 
heart or a fun personality trait. This way, 
the company or brand becomes more 
intimate and real to them.”
Throughout the year, Fletcher intro -
duces herself to her 11,000-plus followers 
and counting with an upbeat caption 
detailing some personal info (she’s a leftieintimate and real to them.”
Throughout the year, Fletcher intro -
duces herself to her 11,000-plus followers 
and counting with an upbeat caption 
detailing some personal info (she’s a leftie 
and was also a classical voice major in 
college). She also encourages followers 
to share something about themselves in 
return, ensuring a healthy dose of friendly, 
conversational commentary. 
In addition, the entrepreneur reg -
ularly celebrates her team. “We want 
clients to see that there is a group of 
people making their wedding florals 
happen,” she explains. “I love show -
casing each team member because we all have different strengths when working on 
events. It also makes our staff feel good, too,” she adds. “They feel invested in the 
company — and that is so important.”
So far, putting herself out there has paid dividends, with engaged couples seeking 
out not just Hana Floral Design but Fletcher herself. “Weddings and events are verySo far, putting herself out there has paid dividends, with engaged couples seeking 
out not just Hana Floral Design but Fletcher herself. “Weddings and events are very 
personal,” says the designer. “Clients want to know who is working on their event and 
how that person may align with their personality or vibe.” 
SOCIAL SAVVY
Showcase the “Who” 
Behind Your Work 
14 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGGET MUCH MORE WITH
A GOTFLOWERS POS
Design and Recipe Management
Event Management
Look up products by recipe and edit as needed
Calculate cost and selling price for new recipes
Send proposals with pictures
Request payments
In addition to POS functionality, the software readily 
assists with:
FiIl custom orders to value
Price arrangements accurately with market prices
Manage Cost of Goods
Track waste
Create shopping lists
Inventory Management
Record incoming items including hard goods, flowers, gifts and more
Track usage through  recipes and salesManage Cost of Goods
Track waste
Create shopping lists
Inventory Management
Record incoming items including hard goods, flowers, gifts and more
Track usage through  recipes and sales
View available inventory in real time
The GotFlowers POS saves time, saves money, 
and improves profits.
Find out more at https://gotflowers.com/cloud-service> While the pandemic reminded us of the importance of core workers, it also brought 
into sharp focus the effectiveness of business leaders. We saw firsthand how every -
one from retail shop owners to corporate CEOs had to adapt quickly to a variety of 
challenges, from staffing issues to changing consumer behaviors. A lot was on the 
line for companies of all sizes. It was a sink or swim experience. 
According to Glenna Hecht, a Dallas–based human resources expert who spe -
cializes in training, speaking engagements, and consulting with clients across the 
country, good leadership is so much more than merely logging record profits whencializes in training, speaking engagements, and consulting with clients across the 
country, good leadership is so much more than merely logging record profits when 
times are good. It’s about showing up, keeping your door open, setting a good 
example, and walking the talk.
No matter how deeply ingrained your leadership qualities, there is always room 
for improvement. Here are Hecht’s five A’s to improve your approach: 
	■AWARENESS  “Being aware involves four steps: observe, listen, think, and 
connect. Sometimes owners or managers leave out a step; sometimes the 
connecting — aka a reactive emotion or reprimand — comes too soon. 
How many times did we believe we had all the information 
and find out we were missing a valuable piece? By that 
time, whatever we’ve said can’t be unsaid. Remember to 
observe and listen first — this gives a good leader time 
to think, bring down the energy, and react calmly.”
	■ACCOUNTABILITY  “Ultimately, workers follow what aobserve and listen first — this gives a good leader time 
to think, bring down the energy, and react calmly.”
	■ACCOUNTABILITY  “Ultimately, workers follow what a 
leader does or does not do. Ask yourself, am I consistent 
in my communication? Am I saying one thing and doing 
something else? Also, don’t hesitate to get in the trenches. 
W. Edwards Deming once said, ‘You can expect what you 
inspect.’ You must show up to lead — otherwise, you 
can’t effectively hold people accountable. At the end 
of the day, you’re a role model for the entire team.”
	■AVAILABLITY  “Owners and managers like to 
boast that they have an open-door policy. But is 
your door truly open or is it more like a screen 
door, with you half listening, distracted by your 
email or phone? If you’re not engaged in the 
conversation, workers will notice and might 
be less likely to reach out in the future.”
	■AUTHENTICITY  “At the end of the day, 
no one has all the answers. Whether aconversation, workers will notice and might 
be less likely to reach out in the future.”
	■AUTHENTICITY  “At the end of the day, 
no one has all the answers. Whether a 
shipment was missed or an order of white 
roses delayed, every single day brings 
different challenges. The pandemic only 
amplified this trend. It’s important 
to have a level of vulnerability and 
to be honest. You can say, ‘I don’t 
have the answer at this moment 
but I’m going to figure it out, or 
we’ll figure it out together.’“Sometimes errors are 
serious, and workers need to be 
held accountable and further 
trained. But it’s also important to 
foster an environment in which 
mistakes can be owned up to and 
fixed — even your own.”
	■ADAPTABILITY  “Always be 
ready to adapt to new and 
changing conditions. Let’s 
say, for example, construction 
interrupts your retail displays, 
a key worker moves on, or you 
miss work to stay home with a 
sick child. In these situations, 
you need to rethink andsay, for example, construction 
interrupts your retail displays, 
a key worker moves on, or you 
miss work to stay home with a 
sick child. In these situations, 
you need to rethink and 
regroup. Anticipating the 
need to pivot many times 
a day will help you react 
to ongoing problems 
graciously. Ultimately, 
the way you deal with 
a problem is more 
important than the 
problem itself.” 
Jennifer Sperry  is a 
contributing writer for 
Floral Management 
who focuses on 
lifestyles, florals  
and interiors.Hands On
SHUTTERSTOCK/ FDTEAMTEAM BUILDER
Channel the Five  
A’s of Leadership
16 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGClassico Print Ad_04122021.indd   1Classico Print Ad_04122021.indd   1 4/12/21   12:48 PM4/12/21   12:48 PMEMPLOYEE SPOTLIGHT
Owner/Operator, Palm Springs Florist
Palm Springs, California
> It took the 2008 financial crisis to 
shift Jordan Hall back to his roots in the 
family business, where he would be -
come a third-generation success story.Palm Springs, California
> It took the 2008 financial crisis to 
shift Jordan Hall back to his roots in the 
family business, where he would be -
come a third-generation success story. 
His grandfather started selling flowers 
in 1947, making deliveries by bicycle 
with his wife perched on the handlebars 
holding the flowers. Today this family 
florist is breaking records with revenue 
and profit margins, thanks to Jordan’s 
efforts at building the company’s online 
presence.
Those online marketing efforts 
included failures. “The trick to failure is 
to fail fast, move on and try something 
else. It took us a bit to figure out what 
we were trying to do, but once we did, 
it’s been a home run,” Hall says. “I’m 
really standing on the shoulders of six 
decades of my family’s time and effort 
and all the wonderful employees we’ve 
had as well. I take credit for nothing.”
Best Mother’s Day tip:
“We’ve finally cracked the code that 
works for us to scale up for the bigand all the wonderful employees we’ve 
had as well. I take credit for nothing.”
Best Mother’s Day tip:
“We’ve finally cracked the code that 
works for us to scale up for the big 
holidays. By streamlining the green -
ing process, it’s made life easier on 
the employees and enabled us to fill 
more orders. Two full weeks prior to 
the holiday we green a vase, wrap the greens in a rubber band, and put it in a 
bucket of water that holds 10 to 15 pre-
done greens. In the cooler, we can look 
at buckets and know how many we 
have, with goals determined by sales 
records. Pre-greening streamlines the 
design process. This Valentine’s Day 
I came in at 6 a.m. and left at 6 p.m., 
and we delivered more arrangements 
on the 14th than we did in the previous 
75 years.”
Biggest challenge:
“Everything has never been more 
expensive. The cost of doing business 
is high now, which makes juggling 
the business side of the cost of goods 
challenging. We’ve found that custom -“Everything has never been more 
expensive. The cost of doing business 
is high now, which makes juggling 
the business side of the cost of goods 
challenging. We’ve found that custom -
ers are willing to pay more money for 
something truly different, unique and 
memorable even in an economy with 
doom and gloom. We’ve been focusing 
on different arrangements and styles 
that capture attention. We’ve had a lot 
of success.”How we drive sales:
“We invested in our website and take our 
own arrangement photos. We’ve found 
that if we can get what we’re really good 
at in front of customers’ eyes, they’re 
willing to spend top dollar for something 
that’s really awesome. We have 75 per -
cent of consumers going through our 
website or on our website and calling us 
— with more sell-through.”
My secret weapon:
“Sharing my enthusiasm with customers. 
When I was young, I thought flowers were 
lame — an old person thing. Now when 
I’m talking to young people, especiallyMy secret weapon:
“Sharing my enthusiasm with customers. 
When I was young, I thought flowers were 
lame — an old person thing. Now when 
I’m talking to young people, especially 
potential wedding clients, the guys are 
often super disinterested. I have a conver -
sation with the groom, telling him, ‘Flowers 
are super cool — this could be really fun 
for you.’ It’s amazing how excited they can 
get about our product.” 
Julie Martens Forney is a contributing 
writer for Floral Management.
Talent  BY JULIE MARTENS FORNEY
Jordan Hall
18 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGGrowth  BY BILL SCHAFFER
CHALLENGES, CHOICES AND COMPROMISES IN  
SUSTAINABLE WEDDING DESIGN
> It is becoming increasingly common 
for wedding couples to ask about 
sustainability — not only in design 
work, but in the industry. These cou -
ples want to know how they can have 
Instagram-worthy florals with little 
environmental impact.
Many times, my team’s response 
to their questions varies based onples want to know how they can have 
Instagram-worthy florals with little 
environmental impact.
Many times, my team’s response 
to their questions varies based on 
the overall scale of the floral designs, 
whether we are designing on site or off 
site, the flowers used, and even how 
much the couple is willing to pay for 
extra services, such as repurposing 
flowers after the big day.
My team and I have found that the 
best way to address these questions is 
to be transparent. Be honest with your 
client about what you can do, what they 
can do, and most importantly — what 
they can afford to do to create an event 
that is as sustainable as possible.
Sourcing Sustainably
The good news is that if you cannot 
source all the flowers and foliage locally, 
you can buy flowers that are certified 
sustainable. 
There are many certifications in 
the floral industry that require growers 
to collect rainwater for their irrigation 
systems, compost tons of vegetativesustainable. 
There are many certifications in 
the floral industry that require growers 
to collect rainwater for their irrigation 
systems, compost tons of vegetative 
waste, limit pesticide use, conserve 
energy, offset carbon footprints and 
more. Some certifications also focus 
on social sustainability, which includes 
providing medical, dental and meal 
programs to their employees and their 
families, and even offering educational 
and after school programs for kids 
and teenagers. 
Of course, there are compromises: 
Like most other commodities, flowers 
grown domestically and internationally 
must be transported. Even some of the 
most sustainable companies must live 
with this reality, and the companies ded -
icated to being sustainable try to offset 
their carbon footprint in other ways. 
Compromising on Design
Much of our team’s capability to be 
sustainable centers on the scale of the designs and whether we have access to 
the venue hours in advance so we canCompromising on Design
Much of our team’s capability to be 
sustainable centers on the scale of the designs and whether we have access to 
the venue hours in advance so we can 
design onsite. If we can design onsite, we 
don’t need to use as many unsustainable 
materials, and we don’t need as much 
transportation. Unfortunately, many 
venues don’t allow designers access to 
the site hours in advance. 
When my team talks with couples 
that are concerned about their impact 
on the environment, we let them know 
that certain structures will require 
materials that aren’t seen as sustain -
able. I want to offer a word of caution 
on chicken wire. While it is seen as a 
more sustainable option because it can 
be used several times, it is covered in 
plastic, and if it isn’t, it will rust. (Recent 
research has shown that rust affects 
groundwater and wells). What’s a florist 
to do? Compromise. Decisions about 
sustainable design comes down to what 
your client can live with — and what youresearch has shown that rust affects 
groundwater and wells). What’s a florist 
to do? Compromise. Decisions about 
sustainable design comes down to what 
your client can live with — and what you 
can live with.
Repurposing Flowers 
If clients ask whether you offer a service 
to pick up the flowers and distribute 
them to senior living facilities or hos -
pitals where the flowers will continue 
to bring joy, let them know that you do 
it — for a price. You will need extra labor at the end of the event to gather, sepa -
rate and pack the flowers. You will need 
additional labor in the morning to pick 
them up, drive them to the dropoff loca -
tions and possibly distribute them. If the 
client isn’t willing to pay for it, let them 
know how they and their friends can 
take the designs apart, and even offer to 
show them how.
It is important that every designer 
works toward sustainable practices and 
is prepared to answer clients’ questions 
about it. But in doing so, we must beshow them how.
It is important that every designer 
works toward sustainable practices and 
is prepared to answer clients’ questions 
about it. But in doing so, we must be 
honest with ourselves and our clients 
about what is possible — and be ready to 
make compromises. 
Bill Schaffer  is the owner of Schaffer 
Designs. He specializes in event 
design, education, showroom and trade 
show design, and overseas product 
development. Bill and his wife, Kristine 
Kratt, are cutting-edge creators 
of “floral-sharing” opportunities 
through their award-winning exhibits 
at the Philadelphia Flower Show 
and numerous commissioned floral 
art installations. They are authors 
of Taking the Flower Show Home. 
Bill now spreads his love of flowers 
and floral design worldwide as Floral 
Fundamentals Ambassador.
stunning  and sustainable  The florals for this San Antonio, Texas wedding were designedBill now spreads his love of flowers 
and floral design worldwide as Floral 
Fundamentals Ambassador.
stunning  and sustainable  The florals for this San Antonio, Texas wedding were designed 
with sustainability in mind. The orchids on the table head are held onto steel mesh with pins and the 
permanent hanging botanicals can be reused for other events. 
JERRY HAYES PHOTOGRAPHY 
20 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGFresh Choices  BY KATIE VINCENT
FABULOUS FILLERS
> For many parts of the country, late spring through summer signals 
the return of farmers’ markets — opportunities for consumers to 
mingle with local flower growers and explore their array of products. 
Among them: intriguing fillers of every shape, color and texture. 
Christy Hulsey, owner of Colonial House of Design in Atlanta, Georgia, 
has a soft spot for these flowers. “They’re not as famous as focal blooms, 
but to me, they are the real superstars,” she says. “They drive the color,has a soft spot for these flowers. “They’re not as famous as focal blooms, 
but to me, they are the real superstars,” she says. “They drive the color, 
the mood, the aesthetic of any design in my lineup. These are the 
flowers I use to pump up the volume — or tone down the noise, for that 
matter.” Her “short” list of favorites include basil, chamomile, eucalyptus, 
feverfew, gomphrena, hellebore, lavender, lilac, narcissus, sweet peas, 
thistle and waxflower. 
statice
Harmony Harvest Farmeupatorium
Creekside Growers
monarda
Harmony Harvest Farm‘sweet  autumn ’ clematis
Creekside Growers
SHUTTERSTOCK/TAMU1500 SHUTTERSTOCK/EDITA MEDEINA SHUTTERSTOCK/SPLINE_XSHUTTERSTOCK/GLANDSTUDIO
22 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGWhenever possible, Hulsey  
likes to source her fillers from small 
Georgia farms. “My typical recipe 
includes more fillers than focals, 
so this is what I’m buying in bulk, 
and that volume can make a big 
impact for these businesses, asGeorgia farms. “My typical recipe 
includes more fillers than focals, 
so this is what I’m buying in bulk, 
and that volume can make a big 
impact for these businesses, as 
well as my regional economy,” she 
says. Additionally, these products 
tend to be more budget-friendly, 
without the logistical costs of 
trucking and shipping. “That lower 
price is liberating,” she says. “I love 
to feel free to use a lot of flowers.” 
Here are some stunning 
American-grown fillers to try this 
summer. 
Katie Vincent is the senior contributing 
editor of Floral Management.solidago  
Mellano & Co.
‘peter  cottontail ’ yarrow
Creekside Growers
passionflower  vine
Creekside Growers
nepeta
Creekside Growers‘blue horizon ’ ageratum
Creekside Growersnigella
Harmony Harvest Farmlarkspur  delphinium
Harmony Harvest Farmfeverfew
Harmony Harvest FarmSHUTTERSTOCK/KATARZYNA MAZUROWSKA SHUTTERSTOCK/CRISTINA IONESCU
SHUTTERSTOCK/INFOFLOWERSPLANTS
SHUTTERSTOCK/SARAH2 SHUTTERSTOCK/HAWK777Harmony Harvest Farmfeverfew
Harmony Harvest FarmSHUTTERSTOCK/KATARZYNA MAZUROWSKA SHUTTERSTOCK/CRISTINA IONESCU
SHUTTERSTOCK/INFOFLOWERSPLANTS
SHUTTERSTOCK/SARAH2 SHUTTERSTOCK/HAWK777
  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 23> WIN BACK SYMPATHY SALES
24 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGPaul Raimondi remembers when funeral flowers were simple: Families 
would pick a casket spray or standing easel from a small selection. 
Almost no modifications were requested. Only a few flower varieties 
were used and florists could simply make substitutions if needed.
“They were very standardized,” says Raimondi, who purchased his 
parents’ Baltimore-area flower shop in  1985. “It has changed dramati -
cally with the type of flowers and the arrangements.”
So, too, has how the orders come in. Many families still call or visit one of 
Raimondi’s four shops. Others take a more  modern approach, ordering through theSo, too, has how the orders come in. Many families still call or visit one of 
Raimondi’s four shops. Others take a more  modern approach, ordering through the 
shop’s website. Raimondi’s touchpoints are  becoming the exception, however, as 
some florists across the country have little or no contact with the families and work 
through the funeral homes instead.Win Back  
Sympathy Sales
As funeral homes evolve into one-stop shops for families,  
florists are finding new ways to keep the sympathy sales  
coming and remain a funeral home’s florist of choice. 
BY LAURIE HERRERA
the finishing  touch  A designer at Raimondi’s Florist in the Baltimore area works on a standing spray.
SHUTTERSTOCK/ NIKKI ZALEWSKI
  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 25
because they had to replace the entire 
book rather than a few pages. Chris 
Drummond, AAF, PFCI, president of 
the Philadelphia flower shop, says 
he removed all the books from cir -
culation about seven years ago andbook rather than a few pages. Chris 
Drummond, AAF, PFCI, president of 
the Philadelphia flower shop, says 
he removed all the books from cir -
culation about seven years ago and 
replaced them with tablets that could 
only access his shop’s website. The 
tablets were a one-time expense and 
required no updating when prices 
changed because the website itself is 
updated regularly.
“We thought the funeral directors 
would just love it, but for the most 
part they didn’t,” says Drummond. 
“The problem with the tablets is they 
have to remember to charge them and 
they have to be ready when the family 
comes in.”
It was also another piece of hard -
ware the funeral directors had to 
manage. Many told Drummond they 
would rather load the Penny’s website 
on their own laptops. Drummond says 
the tablet experiment was a learning for the flowers. For those, he partners 
with Atchison, a friend and business 
associate for more than 20 years.
Creating a Funeral 
Home Presencethe tablet experiment was a learning for the flowers. For those, he partners 
with Atchison, a friend and business 
associate for more than 20 years.
Creating a Funeral 
Home Presence
At Grace, families select a package that 
includes a price point for flowers. Then 
they select floral arrangements from a 
ring-bound book provided by Atchison. 
Because he’s not there to talk to the 
families, Atchison has included pages 
that show how big the casket sprays are 
based on price, detail additional family 
arrangements to consider, and explain 
how families can customize tributes.
Atchison says the book works well 
until he updates prices. Then he needs 
to drive to each funeral home that has 
one of his books, remove the old pages, 
and insert the new ones.
At Penny’s by Plaza Flowers, the 
shop used to provide funeral homes 
with custom-made photo books. That 
got expensive when prices changed At McAdams Floral in Victoria, 
Texas, about 65 percent of the familyshop used to provide funeral homes 
with custom-made photo books. That 
got expensive when prices changed At McAdams Floral in Victoria, 
Texas, about 65 percent of the family 
tribute orders come from funeral homes 
rather than the families of the deceased. 
H. Clay Atchison III, president, says he 
first noticed a shift in order origination 
about 15 years ago when a corporation 
purchased a local funeral home and 
began promoting itself as a one-stop 
shop for all funeral-related needs, includ -
ing flowers. About seven years ago, an 
independent funeral home in his commu -
nity also began offering package deals.
Charlie Hauboldt III, president of 
Grace Funeral Home in Victoria, Texas, 
says the package deals streamline the 
funeral planning process and alleviate 
some of the grieving family’s stress.
“It is appealing to someone to walk 
in and know that all the questions can be 
answered at one location, all of the deci -
sions can be made at one location, and“It is appealing to someone to walk 
in and know that all the questions can be 
answered at one location, all of the deci -
sions can be made at one location, and 
you can write one check,” says Hauboldt, 
who independently owns every business 
he sells services or products for except 
it pays to listen  Chris Drummond (left), AAF, PFCI, of Penny’s by Plaza Flowers in Philadelphia, has tried a variety of ways to provide funeral homes with 
access to his business’s sympathy designs to share with families. He says the best approach is to be flexible and listen to what each funeral home needs. 
26 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG> WIN BACK SYMPATHY SALESexperience. While a few funeral direc -
tors have accepted them, most declined 
them altogether.
“You have to listen to what the 
funeral director is saying,” says 
Drummond. “It’s not a one-size-fits-all 
solution. We have to be flexible and we 
have to provide them with the solution 
they want.”funeral director is saying,” says 
Drummond. “It’s not a one-size-fits-all 
solution. We have to be flexible and we 
have to provide them with the solution 
they want.”
In fact, some don’t want to be both -
ered with the flowers at all and either 
send the family to Drummond’s shop or 
arrange for him to meet with them at the 
funeral home.
Negotiating Commission 
Because one-stop funeral homes are 
coordinating flower sales, many request 
a commission from the florist. Some 
funeral home corporations even require 
the florist to sign a contract for a certain 
percentage of the sale.
“I would say it’s the rare exception 
to hear 35 percent,” says Tim Huckabee, 
president of The Profitable Florist (for -
merly known as Floral Strategies). “Most 
operate somewhere in the 20 to 30 
percent range.”
That’s an expensive pill to swallow, 
especially for time-consuming and 
expensive casket sprays or easels, but 
Huckabee points to similar percentages 
for florists who use wire services.That’s an expensive pill to swallow, 
especially for time-consuming and 
expensive casket sprays or easels, but 
Huckabee points to similar percentages 
for florists who use wire services.
Atchison says he was able to nego -
tiate a 15 percent commission with the 
funeral homes he works with. That rate 
enables him to be profitable without 
sacrificing flower quantity or quality, 
he says. And while he’s sacrificing a 
percentage of his sales to be a funeral 
home’s preferred florist, Atchison says 
it’s worth it for the secondary sales.
“I believe that when out-of-town 
people are talking to family, or there 
are cousins who can’t make it, that the 
funeral home is passing around our 
name,” says Atchison. “Us giving the 15 
percent off is worth the referrals.”
Drummond says corporations tend 
to push for higher commissions than 
independently owned funeral homes, 
sometimes making them unprofitable 
for the florist. In addition, florists may 
outbid one another, offering the funeralto push for higher commissions than 
independently owned funeral homes, 
sometimes making them unprofitable 
for the florist. In addition, florists may 
outbid one another, offering the funeral 
homes a higher commission rate. 
Florists then have to make counteroffers 
or potentially lose the funeral home’s 
business.In lieu of “In lieu of …”
The soothing nature of flowers can be so potent, just seeing a photo of 
them can elicit a powerful emotional response.
Case in point: A woman was driving home from the funeral home where 
she had been planning her late husband’s service. As she passed Penny’s 
by Plaza Flowers, the setting sun reflected off the shop’s van, its vinyl 
wrap emblazoned with flowers. The image provided such comfort during a 
time of intense emotional distress, that the woman sent a thank-you note 
to the shop.
“It was just a vinyl wrap for the van, but she took the time to actually write 
a letter,” says Chris Drummond, AAF, PFCI, president of the Philadelphiato the shop.
“It was just a vinyl wrap for the van, but she took the time to actually write 
a letter,” says Chris Drummond, AAF, PFCI, president of the Philadelphia 
flower shop. “Flowers make a huge difference when they’re grieving.”
So when family members sit down to write their loved one’s obituary, they 
may not realize what they’ll be missing when they add, “In lieu of flowers …” 
to the end.
“It’s not that they don’t like flowers; they just don’t know how important 
they are in the process,” says Drummond. “I’ve had customers say, ‘I was 
never really a flower person, but when my husband died or my mom died 
and I got those flowers, it meant so much to me.’”
Todd Van Beck, program director of the Cincinnati College of Mortuary 
Science, says funeral flowers bring warmth and comfort to a somber oc -
casion. He says some people see sympathy flowers as a waste because 
their beauty is so brief. But their impact lasts long after the funeral, 
says Van Beck.casion. He says some people see sympathy flowers as a waste because 
their beauty is so brief. But their impact lasts long after the funeral, 
says Van Beck.
“Following the service, the bereaved are left with an indelible impression of 
the funeral,” he says. “Flowers do not wither and die in the mind of the be -
reaved. They are recalled time and again as indelible memories.”
H. Clay Atchison III, president of McAdams Floral in Victoria, Texas, says 
he encourages his local funeral homes to provide families with alternative 
phrases to “in lieu of,” which puts limits on how people grieve or express 
their sympathy. He provides these options:
• Memorial contributions may be made to ____   .
• We encourage ____  contributions in his/her honor.
• His/her favorite cause, ____   , is accepting donations.
• ____  is his/her choice for memorial contributions.
• A memorial has been set up in his/her name at ____   .
• Contributions may be made to the charity of your choice.• ____  is his/her choice for memorial contributions.
• A memorial has been set up in his/her name at ____   .
• Contributions may be made to the charity of your choice.
• Flowers are welcome. Contributions may be sent to ____   .
SHUTTERSTOCK/ 9DREAM STUDIO
  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 27Making the List
Holidays and wedding seasons come and go, creating 
peaks and valleys for floral sales. Sympathy sales can help 
level those valleys because they come year round. But fu -
neral directors can be gatekeepers, sending orders only to 
specific florists. To ensure you’re on their list, offer a level 
of customer service that differentiates you from the com -
petition, and avoid the pitfalls that can taint the funeral 
director–florist relationship.
DO
• Make your services available outside normal busi -
ness hours.  Funeral flowers may need to be delivered 
early in the morning and late in the evening.
• Offer to transport flowers.  Todd Van Beck, programness hours.  Funeral flowers may need to be delivered 
early in the morning and late in the evening.
• Offer to transport flowers.  Todd Van Beck, program 
director of the Cincinnati College of Mortuary Services 
and a former funeral director, says a top-notch florist 
will help transport flowers from the funeral home to 
follow-up locations.
• Give the funeral directors your cell phone number. 
You should be easily accessible if problems arise.
• Make fixing funeral flower mistakes a priority. There’s 
a tiny window to correct errors before the funeral starts.
• Check in with the funeral home to see how you’re 
doing.  Charlie Hauboldt III, president of Grace Funeral 
Home in Victoria, Texas, recommends following up 
once a month to ensure you are meeting the expec -
tations of the funeral home and their clients. Try to 
schedule a face-to-face meeting with the funeral home 
director if possible.
• Make it easy for funeral homes to promote yourtations of the funeral home and their clients. Try to 
schedule a face-to-face meeting with the funeral home 
director if possible.
• Make it easy for funeral homes to promote your 
services.  Provide books, brochures, or websites that 
funeral directors can show to families.
DON’T
• Don’t use old flowers. “That is a mistake with a capital 
M,” says Van Beck. The flowers may droop and lose 
petals before the day’s events are through.
• Don’t use greens that drop leaves.  Funeral staff clean 
the facility before and after services. Don’t give them 
more work to do.
• Don’t track dirt, mud, snow, etc., into the funeral 
home.  See above.
• Don’t play loud music inside the delivery van when 
driving up to funeral homes. If the funeral director is 
meeting with a family or mourners are already on site, 
the music could be disruptive. 
• Don’t be late. Funeral homes may schedule multiple 
services in a day. If the flowers aren’t on time, the fu -meeting with a family or mourners are already on site, 
the music could be disruptive. 
• Don’t be late. Funeral homes may schedule multiple 
services in a day. If the flowers aren’t on time, the fu -
neral may go on without them, much to the grieving 
family’s dismay.
• Don’t let your ego get in the way. Even if the family 
mistakenly orders the wrong thing, fix it without com -
ment. “What we’re doing for this family is a lot larger 
than a $200 arrangement,” says Hauboldt.
28 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG> WIN BACK SYMPATHY SALESThe back-and-forth so aggravated 
Raimondi, he stopped offering commis -
sions altogether. Raimondi says he was 
offering 25 percent commissions for a 
long time, but other area florists began 
offering 30 and even 40 percent.
Be the Florist of Choice
Atchison knows a florist who recently 
stopped offering commissions to 
funeral homes. That florist’s sympathy 
sales dissolved practically overnight.Be the Florist of Choice
Atchison knows a florist who recently 
stopped offering commissions to 
funeral homes. That florist’s sympathy 
sales dissolved practically overnight. 
Raimondi’s Florist, however, still receives 
many referrals from funeral homes. In 
fact, funeral sales make up 43 percent 
of his business. Raimondi operates four 
locations in the Baltimore area — one is 
almost 19,000 square feet — delivering 
to 133 funeral homes.
“I think it’s our reputation,” says 
Raimondi, a third-generation florist. “I’ve 
been in the business for 62 years and we 
do a lot of custom work.”
The shop is known for its custom 
easels, which can contain hundreds of 
flowers. Raimondi says the templates are 
custom made, with each flower carefully 
placed by hand. It can take anywhere from a couple of hours to half the day to 
complete one piece.
Huckabee says florists who consis -
tently deliver quality products and provide 
excellent customer service are like acomplete one piece.
Huckabee says florists who consis -
tently deliver quality products and provide 
excellent customer service are like a 
feather in the caps of funeral directors. 
Because families often deal only with the 
funeral homes, everything — good or bad 
— ultimately falls on their shoulders. No 
matter how high the commission, funeral 
homes won’t continue to work with flo -
rists who don’t meet their expectations.
“It’s a relationship like any other,” 
Huckabee says. “It needs to be coddled 
and nurtured. It takes some effort, but 
it’s time well spent.”
He recommends florists who want 
more sympathy work start by introducing 
themselves to local funeral directors. 
Show them a portfolio, ask how you can 
work with them, and follow up periodically 
to see whether they need your services.
“You can get a bigger slice of the 
business,” says Huckabee. “You’ve got to 
be proactive.”
Atchison spends a lot of time nur -
turing relationships with his local funeral“You can get a bigger slice of the 
business,” says Huckabee. “You’ve got to 
be proactive.”
Atchison spends a lot of time nur -
turing relationships with his local funeral 
directors, two of whom have chosen him as their preferred florist. He favors funeral 
orders to larger, more lucrative wedding 
orders and has worked to make sympathy 
sales almost 30 percent of his business.
Atchison likens the relationship 
between a funeral director and his or her 
preferred florist to a marriage. It can be 
lifelong, but it requires give and take on 
both sides, meeting each other’s expec -
tations, lauding each other when things 
go right, and communicating when 
things go wrong.
Hauboldt appreciates that Atchison 
goes the extra mile, extending the 
attention to the funeral home staff, 
he says. For example, Atchison hands 
out Christmas presents to everyone at 
Grace Funeral Home. The rapport is so 
great, Hauboldt — whose funeral-related 
businesses span almost every aspecthe says. For example, Atchison hands 
out Christmas presents to everyone at 
Grace Funeral Home. The rapport is so 
great, Hauboldt — whose funeral-related 
businesses span almost every aspect 
including pet cremation, memorial gifts, 
and cemeteries — says he would never 
consider buying a flower shop. “Clay and 
I are good friends,” says Hauboldt. “I 
would never cross those lines.” 
Laurie Herrera  is a contributing writer 
for Floral Management. 
stellar  sympathy  sales  Raimondi’s Florist, which has four shops serving the Baltimore area, says sympathy sales make up about 43 percent of the 
business’s revenue. Owner Paul Raimondi credits the business’s reputation and ability to do custom work for its strong presence in funeral homes. 
  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 29Sympathy Styling
Inspired Designs to Celebrate Life
SYNDICATE HAS LONG SINCE OFFERED  a line of sympathy 
products for professional florists and have recently determined thatInspired Designs to Celebrate Life
SYNDICATE HAS LONG SINCE OFFERED  a line of sympathy 
products for professional florists and have recently determined that 
the collection has an updated story to tell. With cremations on the rise 
and an increasing demand for unique and personalized creations, 
the collection of sympathy products offered by Syndicate provide 
the perfect foundation for such requests. For example, the Serenity 
Collection of large foam cages and accessories offer a cohesive and 
sturdy system for displaying cremation urns, photos and statuary, and 
can handle just about any personal item the family wants to feature. 
Tried and true standards like the designer urns, casket sprays and 
Aquaforms round out a complete collection of sympathy products. 
And this is all well and good, but it has been many years since 
a printed resource has been created to showcase these products, 
capture the essence of the advancements occurring in sympathyAnd this is all well and good, but it has been many years since 
a printed resource has been created to showcase these products, 
capture the essence of the advancements occurring in sympathy 
work, and inspire the professional florist.This funeral flower tribute guide features over 
75 sympathy designs presented by color as well 
as category and offers floral solutions for casket 
sprays, standing sprays, cremation arrangements, 
wreaths, crosses, hearts, baskets, and take-home 
arrangements.
Large feature images help clients choose the 
tribute, colors, and floral styles that best represent 
their loved one. Designs range from classic to 
contemporary with construction materials and 
floral recipe provided for every piece. The floral 
material showcased in this book can also be easily 
substituted based on seasonality.
Thoughtful flower selections and achievable 
designs make this a unique and invaluable 
resource to Funeral Directors and modern floristssubstituted based on seasonality.
Thoughtful flower selections and achievable 
designs make this a unique and invaluable 
resource to Funeral Directors and modern florists 
alike. Clients will be pleased when the designs 
match their expectations as this book provides 
realistic floral arrangements that capture character 
and personality, not perfection. 
Shop our full collection of Sympathy 
Products including the Sympathy Styling 
Book (#1012-06-00) on SyndicateSales.com
INSPIRED SYMPATHY DESIGNS 
Celebrate Life 
INSPIRED SYMPATHY DESIGNS 
Syndicate is proud to offer a new design 
resource for professional florists.Sympathy Styling: Inspired Designs to 
Celebrate Life  is a funeral flowers selection book for 
grieving loved ones as well as a sales tool and recipe guide for 
the modern florist. Packed with beautiful floral creations, this 
book offers tasteful tribute designs that any florist can replicate.
Florists will be delighted to learn that this book will hold up inbook offers tasteful tribute designs that any florist can replicate.
Florists will be delighted to learn that this book will hold up in 
their workroom as it is printed on plastic sheets of paper using  
UV ink that makes this resource 100% waterproof.
THE SYMPATHY GUIDE FEATURES:
• 100 pages of tribute designs, 40 pages of floral recipes,  
10 pages of product index
• Large feature images
• Categorized by color and category
• Construction material list and floral recipe for every piece
• Printed on plastic pages using UV ink for a waterproof construction
• Clear spiral binding to make it easy to lay flatPAID ADVERTISMENTSympathy Styling
Inspired Designs to Celebrate Life
SYNDICATE HAS LONG SINCE OFFERED  a line of sympathy 
products for professional florists and have recently determined that 
the collection has an updated story to tell. With cremations on the rise 
and an increasing demand for unique and personalized creations,the collection has an updated story to tell. With cremations on the rise 
and an increasing demand for unique and personalized creations, 
the collection of sympathy products offered by Syndicate provide 
the perfect foundation for such requests. For example, the Serenity 
Collection of large foam cages and accessories offer a cohesive and 
sturdy system for displaying cremation urns, photos and statuary, and 
can handle just about any personal item the family wants to feature. 
Tried and true standards like the designer urns, casket sprays and 
Aquaforms round out a complete collection of sympathy products. 
And this is all well and good, but it has been many years since 
a printed resource has been created to showcase these products, 
capture the essence of the advancements occurring in sympathy 
work, and inspire the professional florist.This funeral flower tribute guide features over 
75 sympathy designs presented by color as wellwork, and inspire the professional florist.This funeral flower tribute guide features over 
75 sympathy designs presented by color as well 
as category and offers floral solutions for casket 
sprays, standing sprays, cremation arrangements, 
wreaths, crosses, hearts, baskets, and take-home 
arrangements.
Large feature images help clients choose the 
tribute, colors, and floral styles that best represent 
their loved one. Designs range from classic to 
contemporary with construction materials and 
floral recipe provided for every piece. The floral 
material showcased in this book can also be easily 
substituted based on seasonality.
Thoughtful flower selections and achievable 
designs make this a unique and invaluable 
resource to Funeral Directors and modern florists 
alike. Clients will be pleased when the designs 
match their expectations as this book provides 
realistic floral arrangements that capture character 
and personality, not perfection.alike. Clients will be pleased when the designs 
match their expectations as this book provides 
realistic floral arrangements that capture character 
and personality, not perfection. 
Shop our full collection of Sympathy 
Products including the Sympathy Styling 
Book (#1012-06-00) on SyndicateSales.com
INSPIRED SYMPATHY DESIGNS 
Celebrate Life 
INSPIRED SYMPATHY DESIGNS 
Syndicate is proud to offer a new design 
resource for professional florists.
Sympathy Styling: Inspired Designs to 
Celebrate Life  is a funeral flowers selection book for 
grieving loved ones as well as a sales tool and recipe guide for 
the modern florist. Packed with beautiful floral creations, this 
book offers tasteful tribute designs that any florist can replicate.
Florists will be delighted to learn that this book will hold up in 
their workroom as it is printed on plastic sheets of paper using  
UV ink that makes this resource 100% waterproof.
THE SYMPATHY GUIDE FEATURES:their workroom as it is printed on plastic sheets of paper using  
UV ink that makes this resource 100% waterproof.
THE SYMPATHY GUIDE FEATURES:
• 100 pages of tribute designs, 40 pages of floral recipes,  
10 pages of product index
• Large feature images
• Categorized by color and category
• Construction material list and floral recipe for every piece
• Printed on plastic pages using UV ink for a waterproof construction
• Clear spiral binding to make it easy to lay flat
Better 
Business 
AccountsSHUTTERSTOCK/ MASTERPHOTO
32 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG> BETTER BUSINESS ACCOUNTSBefore COVID-19, corporate work provided many florists with a steady, rel -
atively hassle-free stream of income throughout the year, especially during 
slower periods. Whether beautifying lobbies with plants and florals, providing 
arrangements for restaurants and hotels, sending bouquets to employees for 
birthdays and work anniversaries, or doing flowers for annual events, such asarrangements for restaurants and hotels, sending bouquets to employees for 
birthdays and work anniversaries, or doing flowers for annual events, such as 
holiday parties, business-to-business sales provided revenue florists could count on 
to boost their bottom line.
However, when the pandemic hit and nonessential businesses shut down, most 
corporate work dried up. Now, three years later, the work has returned, but for 
many, it’s taken a different form. Some companies have reduced their pre-pandemic 
budgets for floral, partly due to inflation. Other businesses haven’t returned to 
hosting big events but hold smaller events more frequently. 
Ready to reimagine your corporate business? Take a page from the book of these 
florists who did the same.Better 
Business 
Accounts
Florists are building back corporate  
 work post-COVID and finding that much has  
changed, from budgets to delivery addresses. 
BY VICTORIA ABBOTT RICCARDIBusiness 
Accounts
Florists are building back corporate  
 work post-COVID and finding that much has  
changed, from budgets to delivery addresses. 
BY VICTORIA ABBOTT RICCARDI
  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 33Karen Greenoe, OWNER   
Lily Greenthumbs in Charlotte, North Carolina 
Prior to the pandemic, corporate work comprised 25 percent of Greenoe’s business, 
with half coming from local banks and half from the Carolina Panthers football team. 
“We did their flowers for game day, which meant delivering flowers to multiple suites 
and providing small centerpieces for the catered VIP meal,” says Greenoe. When the 
pandemic hit, her corporate work disappeared.
Pivot: Focused on Wedding Work
To make up the business-to-business revenue, Greenoe boosted her wedding work. 
“In 2021, when weddings started coming back, we took absolutely everyone who 
wanted to book,” says Greenoe. During the pandemic, she made it a point to stay in“In 2021, when weddings started coming back, we took absolutely everyone who 
wanted to book,” says Greenoe. During the pandemic, she made it a point to stay in 
touch with her corporate clients, so she’d be top-of-mind when they needed her ser -
vices again.  
Current Status: Staying Flexible for All Budgets 
As corporate work comes back, Greenoe sees a lot of variability in budgets and 
needs. “I’ve had corporate events where I sent them a proposal for $1,500 and they 
have a panic attack and ask what we can do for $15 a table,” she says. “Then, recently, 
I had a Bank of America event and my contact said, ‘This one is not going to be huge 
and we’ll detail it out a week or two before the event.’ Then she comes back to me and 
it’s $10,000 worth of flowers.” Greenoe hasn’t needed to seek out new corporate cli -
ents and says her business is doing well with the accounts she has. “We have a great 
rapport and they know they can come to me and say, ‘Hey, we have an event, we needents and says her business is doing well with the accounts she has. “We have a great 
rapport and they know they can come to me and say, ‘Hey, we have an event, we need 
40 centerpieces, here’s our budget and our color palette.’” John Angelone,  MANAGER   
Angelone’s Florist in Raritan, New Jersey
Angelone’s Florist sits next to several major corporations, pharmaceutical com -
panies and banks and before the pandemic, corporate work comprised 25 to 30 
percent of the florist’s business. “For years and years, we would be going to these 
companies four or five times a day, whether they were sending something to their 
employees, there was a passing in a family, or somebody did exceptionally well that 
month at work,” says John Angelone, who works at the family business alongside 
his father, Lynn Angelone (seen together to the right). “Then, we’d also do events 
with them, whether it was a holiday party or something in the spring. But whenhis father, Lynn Angelone (seen together to the right). “Then, we’d also do events 
with them, whether it was a holiday party or something in the spring. But when 
COVID hit, it was like a faucet that immediately turned off.” 
Pivot: Modernized Floral Designs for a Younger Clientele
After first going into survival mode, the florist went into creative mode to find new 
sources of revenue to fill the corporate void. “We started putting out new products 
different from the stock images we used to do,” says Angelone, both in the store and 
on their website. “We started doing more fun designs and higher-end stuff that was 
more styled, asymmetrical and more bespoke to attract a younger clientele.”
Current Status: Smaller but More Frequent Orders 
“Now, corporate work comprises about 20 percent of our business,” says Angelone. “But 
these clients are having smaller gatherings more often. We’ve recently looked at the fig -“Now, corporate work comprises about 20 percent of our business,” says Angelone. “But 
these clients are having smaller gatherings more often. We’ve recently looked at the fig -
ures and some of these smaller gatherings have been more profitable because the clients 
are spending more to have things look higher end.” Angelone also says he’s become more 
selective with his corporate clients, avoiding those with champagne demands on ginger 
ale budgets. “Before, we used to scratch our heads and say, ‘Okay, how can we make 
this work?’ but nowadays, we’re not as concerned about that. We’ve started focusing on 
our local community and it’s been a game changer. We’re now seeing people come to us 
more organically and they’re the ones that work at these companies. So, they’re coming 
to us for personal reasons and they’re also coming back for business reasons.”
34 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG> BETTER BUSINESS ACCOUNTSBuild Back Your Corporate Salesto us for personal reasons and they’re also coming back for business reasons.”
34 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG> BETTER BUSINESS ACCOUNTSBuild Back Your Corporate Sales
Florists with strong business-to-business sales share their best tips  
to build back corporate sales in a post-COVID world. 
“Do what we did at the beginning, which was to cold call, dress up and go door to door, 
bringing a floral gift to the gatekeepers at hotels, law offices, restaurants and colleges. 
Try to reach the person in human resources in charge of flowers. When new restau -
rants or businesses open, mail letters of introduction with marketing pieces and send 
a bouquet. Most management is young and on social media, so take  
photos of those arrangements with the company tagged and  
post them on Instagram and Facebook.”
—Lisa Hays Holmes, Tiger Lily, Charleston, South Carolina“Communication is key.  Reach out to past clients and let them knowpost them on Instagram and Facebook.”
—Lisa Hays Holmes, Tiger Lily, Charleston, South Carolina“Communication is key.  Reach out to past clients and let them know  
you’re still there and happy to have their business in any way you  
can serve them. Many of the corporate event planners might be new, or they 
lost your business card or can’t find your email. Also, introduce yourself to event 
vendors, like caterers, and let them know you’re available if their clients ever need 
flowers. When you do a corporate event, post on Instagram because you’re letting 
people know you do this work.”
—Karen Greenoe, Lily Greenthumbs, Charlotte, North Carolina
“Reach out to corporate contacts because they may still have  
the money, but they’re spending it differently.  If they used you for 
$30,000 parties, make sure they know you’re available to do everyday work.  
Those contacts still recommend florists to the different departments for birthdays,$30,000 parties, make sure they know you’re available to do everyday work.  
Those contacts still recommend florists to the different departments for birthdays, 
anniversaries and funerals. Also, don’t be afraid to experiment or fail. Nine times  
out of ten, you’re probably going to fail, but if you’d stopped at number nine, you 
would have never gotten to ten. Different things will work at different times  
in a business’s life cycle.”
—Michael Pugh, Pugh’s Flowers, Memphis, Tennessee“Make sure your product is the best it can be and you’re taking care of customers  
as best you can. The more formal you are, the more it hurts you. From your floral  
designs to your music on the radio to what you wear, it all makes a difference.  
For us, it was about being more youthful and fun and less serious.  
Don’t be scared to make a change. Take the biggest risk you can and customers  
will come through your door. Instead of actively looking for corporate work, focusDon’t be scared to make a change. Take the biggest risk you can and customers  
will come through your door. Instead of actively looking for corporate work, focus  
on attracting more local customers because they probably work locally.”
 —John Angelone, Angelone’s Florist in Raritan, New Jersey
SHUTTERSTOCK/EKY STUDIO, FAIRUZAID99, MONAXDK, NADEZHDA F
  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 35Lisa Hays Holmes, OWNER  
Tiger Lily in Charleston, South Carolina 
Before the pandemic, corporate work comprised only 5 percent of Holmes’ business. 
“Most of our corporate business was in hotels and restaurants,” says Holmes. “We 
would do florals for their dining rooms, in-room dining, concierge desk, bakeries, 
spas, bars, lobby pieces and even outdoor tables and pieces around the pool, like 
mixed plant baskets.”
Pivot: Increased Advertising
“I am not a gloom and doom person, so I tripled my advertising during COVID,” saysmixed plant baskets.”
Pivot: Increased Advertising
“I am not a gloom and doom person, so I tripled my advertising during COVID,” says 
Holmes. “I took out ads in magazines, local newsletters and a city paper focusing on 
Charleston events. Because nobody was advertising with them, I would get a full-page 
ad for the price of a quarter-page ad. And I stood out because everyone was sitting at 
home for two months just reading.” 
Holmes also leaned into social media. “I hired a social media manager and we 
upped our game with Instagram, Facebook, blogs and direct email blasts. I didn’t 
focus on flowers, but tried to bring comfort as in, ‘We’re going to get through this.’” 
As a result, Holmes increased her number of followers. 
Current Status: Working Smarter
“I’m constantly getting called by all the major hotels and businesses, but I decided 
only to work with the nicest, most profitable ones close to our production center,”“I’m constantly getting called by all the major hotels and businesses, but I decided 
only to work with the nicest, most profitable ones close to our production center,” 
says Holmes. She’s also servicing several condominium complexes and introduced a 
profitable floral subscription to the residents. “Although I’m working with fewer cor -
porate clients than before COVID, I’m bringing in much more revenue.” 
Victoria Abbott Riccardi  is a contributing writer for Floral Management. Michael Pugh,  CO-OWNER WITH HIS TWO BROTHERS  
Pugh’s Flowers in Memphis, Tennessee 
Before COVID, corporate work constituted 20 percent of Pugh’s business. “Our corpo -
rate work was the traditional kind; an employee gets sick and their coworkers send them 
flowers,” explains Pugh. “Our biggest account is Federal Express because its corporate 
headquarters is here in Memphis. So, every different department [at FedEx] has a budgetflowers,” explains Pugh. “Our biggest account is Federal Express because its corporate 
headquarters is here in Memphis. So, every different department [at FedEx] has a budget 
and we sent flowers if somebody had a birthday, a birth or funeral. Because we never went 
after those corporate events that involved putting $50,000 worth of flowers on tables — 
which is what stopped with COVID — we continued to work during the pandemic.”
Pivot: Eliminated Sales Position 
Pugh’s hired a full-time sales rep years ago to be the face of the company and secure 
new corporate accounts, but the company eliminated the position a year into COVID 
since they couldn’t secure new business accounts, Pugh says. However, the flower shop 
continued to service the corporate clients it had. “We kept 99 percent of our existing 
corporate customers,” says Pugh. “People were still having birthdays and anniversaries, 
we just had to send the arrangements to different places. In fact, our corporate workcorporate customers,” says Pugh. “People were still having birthdays and anniversaries, 
we just had to send the arrangements to different places. In fact, our corporate work 
increased. Instead of buying a birthday cake and some balloons for a birthday in the 
office, the office sent flowers because people couldn’t gather in person.”
Current Status: Leveraging Social Media Marketing 
“To ramp up sales, we’re trying various social media platforms and direct email,” 
says Pugh. “We have two employees in Los Angeles attending social media training 
because the younger generation thinks that’s going to be a better marketing vehicle 
than an old-fashioned sales rep trying to drop in on clients.” In Memphis, about 90 
percent of the businesses have workers in the office and at home, so Pugh’s market -
ing highlights that they can service a hybrid work environment. “We’re also pushing 
the health benefits of plants on our website and social media, hoping to catch theing highlights that they can service a hybrid work environment. “We’re also pushing 
the health benefits of plants on our website and social media, hoping to catch the 
attention of corporate human resource people,” he says. 
36 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG> BETTER BUSINESS ACCOUNTSPlan to wait until summer to think about summer staffing?  
If so, you’re throwing money out the window. 
Planning staffing for the summer is one responsibility you can’t 
afford to put off until tomorrow. If you’re like most florists, you have 
too many employees during the summer months, which can be 
taxing on your payroll.
You may enjoy small periods of good business, but for most shops, June 1 marks 
the beginning of six straight months of non-holiday sales levels. That’s a fact that bears 
repeating: A half-year of non-holiday sales levels starts shortly after Mother’s Day.
If you’re going to make money during these non-holiday periods, your payroll mustrepeating: A half-year of non-holiday sales levels starts shortly after Mother’s Day.
If you’re going to make money during these non-holiday periods, your payroll must 
drop as sales decrease. The secret? Forecast your sales and staff accordingly.
Build a Staffing Plan
Creating a staffing plan should be the starting point for your payroll reduction efforts.  
Just follow these steps:
1. Know Your Non-Holiday Sales Volume . Divide 77 percent by 52 for a weekly 
average of 1.5 percent of annual sales. In other words, you will make approximately 
1.5 percent of annual sales on any given non-holiday week. Multiply your annual 
design sales by 0.015 to get your own average weekly non-holiday design sales. After Mother’s Day,  
most flower shops start  
a six-month stretch of  
non-holiday sales levels. 
Proper staffing can 
significantly reduce  
payroll and increase 
profit margins.
BY PAUL GOODMAN, MBA, PFCISummertime StaffingSave on 
SHUTTERSTOCK/VECTOR-16non-holiday sales levels. 
Proper staffing can 
significantly reduce  
payroll and increase 
profit margins.
BY PAUL GOODMAN, MBA, PFCISummertime StaffingSave on 
SHUTTERSTOCK/VECTOR-16
38 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG
EDITORS’ NOTE  Paul Goodman, MBA, PFCI, and Derrick Myers, CPA, 
CFP, PFCI, love a good financial management challenge, however 
big or small. Send your questions to fmeditor@safnow.org, and we’ll 
challenge the experts to tackle them in an upcoming article.  Summertime StaffingLook for Other Savings
Do a similar productivity analysis for 
your drivers. Just use the number of 
deliveries (instead of number of designs 
produced) on a daily basis to find the 
average number of deliveries by day. 
Staffing sales is a little more difficult 
because the individual must wait for a 
customer to call or come in in order to be 
occupied. Once again, numbers will help.
Check to see what your sales per 
hour are for each day of the week. Staffbecause the individual must wait for a 
customer to call or come in in order to be 
occupied. Once again, numbers will help.
Check to see what your sales per 
hour are for each day of the week. Staff 
according to the sales that are being 
experienced at any given time during 
the day. If you are busiest from 11 a.m. 
to 1 p.m. every day, have two part-time 
people overlap those two hours.
Remember, in all these areas it’s 
better to use more part-time help than 
full-time help because they bring more 
flexibility to any staffing plan.
Don’t Wait
The best time to plan for the future is 
here and now. If you can’t think about 
summer staffing until after Mother’s Day, 
at least make plans to get things under 
control by June 1. If you wait much longer, 
summer may have already passed you 
by. Planning may not be one of the most 
urgent things on your to-do list. It is, 
however, one of the most important. 
Paul Goodman, MBA, PFCI, is a former 
CPA and the founder of Floral Financeby. Planning may not be one of the most 
urgent things on your to-do list. It is, 
however, one of the most important. 
Paul Goodman, MBA, PFCI, is a former 
CPA and the founder of Floral Finance 
Business Services in Tulsa, Oklahoma, 
editor of Floral Finance, and author of 
“The Profit-Minded Florist.”that pace all day, but it’s not unrea -
sonable to expect them to perform 
at that level for six hours a day. The 
result? About $1,440 from eight 
hours of design work. Next, divide 
1,440 by 8 hours to get the average 
design production per hour, which 
is $180 average per hour — a very 
achievable number. 
4. Establish Daily Staffing Levels.  
Take your average daily design 
sales and divide by $180 to get 
the number of design hours you 
need each day. For example, if 
your average Thursday design 
sales are $2,160, you would need 
to provide for a total of 12 hours 
of design that day (2,160 divided 
by 180 is 12). Remember, it isn’t 
necessary to have only full-timesales are $2,160, you would need 
to provide for a total of 12 hours 
of design that day (2,160 divided 
by 180 is 12). Remember, it isn’t 
necessary to have only full-time 
designers. Design hours can 
easily be divided among several 
employees. If you are a retail florist 
doing approximately $400,000 in 
annual sales, you will need less than 
8 hours of design time for most non-
holiday days. Sound impossible? 
Not according to the numbers.
Boost Productivity
Want to boost productivity? What 
works for the holidays will work during 
the off-season as well. Everyone is more 
productive when the shop is making 
multiple copies of each design. At a min -
imum, make two of everything. Put the 
second one in the cooler. You’ll soon see 
efficiency pick up. 2. Figure Out Your Daily Sales. 
Each day of the week has a sales 
pattern. For example, Friday may 
be your busiest day of the week and 
Tuesday your slowest. Your staffing 
needs should fluctuate with sales.Each day of the week has a sales 
pattern. For example, Friday may 
be your busiest day of the week and 
Tuesday your slowest. Your staffing 
needs should fluctuate with sales. 
A non-holiday staffing analysis 
will help you figure out which days 
you need an extra hand and when 
you can get by with less staff. 
Start your sales analysis in the 
design room. First, gather design 
sales data for four consecutive 
non-holiday weeks. Make sure the 
data is broken down by days of the 
week. Use any four consecutive 
weeks during the year that are not 
during holiday periods, but avoid 
January and July because they 
tend to be the lowest sales months 
of the year.
Next, set up a spreadsheet. Put 
the four weeks across the top and the 
days of the week down the left-hand 
side. Now, fill in the blanks with your 
daily sales for each of the four weeks.
When staffing the design room, 
make sure you use only design 
sales — not total sales. Also, make 
sure you do not include weddingsdaily sales for each of the four weeks.
When staffing the design room, 
make sure you use only design 
sales — not total sales. Also, make 
sure you do not include weddings 
or large parties in your daily totals. 
These are special planned events. It’s 
easy to staff these events separately 
because you know in advance when 
they are going to happen.
Add all four Mondays to get the 
total for Monday design sales during 
that period. Divide that total by four, 
and you’ll have your average Monday 
volume. Do the same for the other 
days of the week. Now you can see 
how much design work to expect by 
day for most non-holiday weeks.
3. Assess Your Designers’ 
Productivity.  Before you can finalize 
the design staffing plan, determine 
your designers’ productivity. What is 
a reasonable amount of production 
to expect in the design room? Floral 
Finance has asked hundreds of 
florists that question and the answer 
is always the same. You can expect 
a good designer to put out fourto expect in the design room? Floral 
Finance has asked hundreds of 
florists that question and the answer 
is always the same. You can expect 
a good designer to put out four 
average arrangements per hour.
If your average order size is 
$60, your designers should produce 
$240 at retail prices in one hour. It 
is unlikely a designer can keep up ANALYZE SALES PATTERNS
Florists generally see about 23 percent of their annual sales from their hol -
iday business, according to data from Floral Finance. That figure includes 
Valentine’s Day, Administrative Professionals Day, Mother’s Day, and 
Christmas. The rest of the sales (77 percent) are spread evenly over the 
365 days of the year. 
Florists tend to think of February, April, May and December as very busy 
“holiday months.” But with the exception of December, only a few days of 
each of these months are truly busy. Sales for the other days during those 
months are at non-holiday levels.“holiday months.” But with the exception of December, only a few days of 
each of these months are truly busy. Sales for the other days during those 
months are at non-holiday levels.
Profitable florists understand their permanent staff level should be just 
enough people to cover a non-holiday sales level. For the busy holiday days, 
they add extra help.SHUTTERSTOCK/VECTOR-16
  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 39Up the Supply Chain BY AMANDA JEDLINSKY
THE ‘IT’ (ROSE) FACTOR
> Through his travels to South American 
rose-growing countries, Denver florist 
BJ Dyer, AAF, AIFD, has learned what it 
takes for breeders to develop and grow -
ers to propagate and cultivate a new 
variety of rose. So when a new variety of 
rose takes over Pinterest or TikTok and 
becomes so popular it can be hard to get 
— he understands why.
“Gray roses, dusty lavender roses, 
bronze roses — those are the roses 
that are kind of a fad, and we know theybecomes so popular it can be hard to get 
— he understands why.
“Gray roses, dusty lavender roses, 
bronze roses — those are the roses 
that are kind of a fad, and we know they 
are a fad. It doesn’t make sense for the 
growers to put in huge amounts of pro -
duction, because as soon as the whims 
of the brides change, [the growers] are 
stuck with all these roses that don’t 
really work for daily work,” Dyer says. 
That is but one factor that affects 
the availability of new varieties. While 
the delicate balance of supply and 
demand plays a role, seasonal demand 
and the time it takes to propagate 
enough plants to make sending the 
flowers to market worthwhile also affect 
availability, importers and growers say.
The process to bring a new variety 
into existence is expensive and time 
consuming — sometimes taking as long 
as 10 years, says Jorge Constain, founder 
and president of Choice Farms, which 
imports a variety of garden, tea and 
spray roses as well as novelty flowers,consuming — sometimes taking as long 
as 10 years, says Jorge Constain, founder 
and president of Choice Farms, which 
imports a variety of garden, tea and 
spray roses as well as novelty flowers, 
from South America, Africa and Europe. 
Breeders set out to create a rose with 
very specific traits such as color, produc -
tivity, resistance to disease or a longer 
vase life. They might start with up to one 
million seeds from crossed roses, which 
are germinated, cultivated, evaluated and 
— the majority of the time — eliminated. 
When a breeder believes they have 
a new variety, farms in Europe, Africa, 
Colombia and Ecuador grow a very small 
number of the plants as a test, because 
the different climates in those countries 
affect plants in various ways. If the plant 
makes it through that testing phase, 
the shoots from the mother plants are 
grafted onto root stock for production. 
It can take years to propagate enough 
plants to make it worthwhile for a farmmakes it through that testing phase, 
the shoots from the mother plants are 
grafted onto root stock for production. 
It can take years to propagate enough 
plants to make it worthwhile for a farm 
to produce and sell, says Joey Azout, 
president of Alexandra Farms, a large 
grower of garden roses.“It takes a long time to propagate 
something,” Azout says. “If you have 
one plant and you want to grow 10,000 
plants, you can’t do it in a short period 
of time.”
Another factor affecting avail -
ability is the seasonality of the flower. 
“Everyone wants the same thing at the 
same time,” Azout says, but rose plants 
produce year round. “In November, 
when we have beautiful white roses, no 
one wants them. The growers are left 
stranded with a lot of roses that have 
nowhere to go.” Azout has to balance 
how many roses he wants to sell during 
the height of wedding season with how 
many he’ll have to throw away in the 
off-season. It’s not feasible to increasenowhere to go.” Azout has to balance 
how many roses he wants to sell during 
the height of wedding season with how 
many he’ll have to throw away in the 
off-season. It’s not feasible to increase 
production just for wedding season, he 
says. “Growers can’t up their production 
one month and lower it the next.”
Sometimes, a breeder will only 
permit a limited number of farms to grow a new variety for a set time frame, 
which can also limit availability. Azout’s 
farm has such arrangements, but he 
tries to make sure he is planting to meet 
demand, he says. “If we have a lot of 
demand, we’ll plant a lot of it, it’s just 
slower to get there.”
On the flip side, Constain points 
out that if too many farms grow a new 
variety, supply can outweigh demand 
and spell trouble for the survival of a new 
variety. 
“Is a little demand better than a 
little supply? If the supply is big, the 
variety dies,” he says. “You can’t gauge 
demand, and while something might bevariety. 
“Is a little demand better than a 
little supply? If the supply is big, the 
variety dies,” he says. “You can’t gauge 
demand, and while something might be 
in demand at first, demand can die off,” 
and with it, the variety. 
Amanda Jedlinsky  is the senior content 
strategist for the Society of American 
Florists and editor in chief of Floral 
Management. 
SHUTTERSTOCK/ADCHARIN CHITTHAMMACHUK
40 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGLONG-LASTING,
AWARD-WINNING,
FRESH CUT FLOWERS
AVAILABLE YEAR 
ROUND.
Floral Design & Photography: Paulina 
Nieliwocki, Blue Jasmine Floral
Garden Roses: Princess Maya, Miyabi, 
Princess Pinku Spr, Loli Spr & Sola SprFloral Design & Photography: Paulina 
Nieliwocki, Blue Jasmine Floral
Garden Roses: Princess Maya, Miyabi, 
Princess Pinku Spr, Loli Spr & Sola Spr
Follow us @alexandrafarms
Digital Strategy  BY SARAH SAMPSON
IS YOUR DIGITAL WORK PROTECTED?
> Just as the pre–Valentine’s Day rush 
was kicking in, Jackie Levine discoveredFollow us @alexandrafarms
Digital Strategy  BY SARAH SAMPSON
IS YOUR DIGITAL WORK PROTECTED?
> Just as the pre–Valentine’s Day rush 
was kicking in, Jackie Levine discovered 
photographs of bouquets unique to her 
store, Central Square Florist, were being 
used by other florists. 
A reverse image search on Google 
revealed about 10 different floral web -
sites had posted the exact images from 
Central Square Florist’s website. Some 
sites had multiple images, many from 
Central Square Florist’s most popular 
designs. Some even used the same name 
and descriptions. “English Garden,” 
a design featuring large cymbidium 
orchids, hydrangeas and roses, and 
“Sweet Sea Breeze,” arranged with del -
phiniums, hydrangeas and roses were 
two of the designs she found appropri -
ated by others.
Levine felt violated. “We felt as if 
our hard work — designing the arrange -
ment, photographing it, editing it, 
naming it, writing the product descrip -
tion — was stolen from behind ourLevine felt violated. “We felt as if 
our hard work — designing the arrange -
ment, photographing it, editing it, 
naming it, writing the product descrip -
tion — was stolen from behind our 
back,” says Levine, vice president of the 
Cambridge, Massachusetts flower shop. 
“Which it was.”
In the U.S., copyright protections 
extend to photographs, says David 
Wolfsohn, an intellectual property 
trial lawyer at Duane Morris LLP in Philadelphia. Copyright does not protect 
against the plagiarism of names and 
descriptions of designs. That falls under 
trademark rights, which are significantly 
harder to acquire, Wolfsohn says.
Establishing Copyright
Technically, a creator does not have 
to do anything to establish copyright, 
Wolfsohn says. “If you take a picture 
that has some originality and aesthetic 
to it, you are now the author, and you 
own it,” he says. 
Wolfsohn suggests asking these two 
questions to determine whether a photo 
is protected under copyright law:to it, you are now the author, and you 
own it,” he says. 
Wolfsohn suggests asking these two 
questions to determine whether a photo 
is protected under copyright law:
1. Do you own the photograph? 
This includes having a written 
contract with the photographer 
that says the business 
owns the photographs.
2. Does the photograph have 
some originality? The 
lighting, arrangement, vase, 
positioning, and background 
are all elements that provide 
originality and creativity.
While it isn’t required that copyrights 
be registered with the U.S. Copyright 
Office, Wolfsohn says it’s a step worth 
taking because it enables the owner to establish damages by giving a minimum 
value of the stolen work. It also allows 
the owner to seek attorney fees.
“The goal is to make the infringer 
think it is in their best interest to take the 
images down,” he says.
Registering copyrights for photos 
might sound daunting, but the govern -
ment has established fees  for a group ofthink it is in their best interest to take the 
images down,” he says.
Registering copyrights for photos 
might sound daunting, but the govern -
ment has established fees  for a group of 
work, such as 100 images, which could 
allow a floral shop to update their port -
folio in batches as designs are changed 
with the seasons.
Seeking Removal
Levine didn’t consult a lawyer or take 
legal action after she became aware of 
the copyright infringements of her pho -
tographs. But she did defend her store’s 
work by emailing the offenders and 
asking that her images be removed while 
also asserting her copyright and owner -
ship of the work. She also reported the 
abuse to the web hosting site for each of 
the websites where the images appeared.
Both strategies proved successful. 
In some instances, the store quickly 
removed the images. But in other 
instances, the web hosting company 
removed the images or took down the 
entire page, Levine says.
Those are exactly the stepsIn some instances, the store quickly 
removed the images. But in other 
instances, the web hosting company 
removed the images or took down the 
entire page, Levine says.
Those are exactly the steps 
Wolfsohn recommends. If the images 
are registered with the copyright office, 
the owner can also include language that 
if the images aren’t removed immedi -
ately, they will sue and seek statutory 
damages, Wolfsohn says. 
Educating Others
Levine plans to remain vigilant to protect 
her business’s images. Meanwhile, she 
hopes others in the industry will recog -
nize how to tell the difference between 
protected images and those that they 
have license to use. 
“In most cases, a lot of infringement 
is not necessarily intentional,” Wolfsohn 
says. “A lot of people copy things off the 
internet and have the misimpression that 
because they can access it for free that 
they don’t need permission to use it.” 
Sarah Sampson  is a contributing writer 
for Floral Management.internet and have the misimpression that 
because they can access it for free that 
they don’t need permission to use it.” 
Sarah Sampson  is a contributing writer 
for Floral Management. 
42 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGLearn More:    www.PhotoFlorals.com
Personalize your arrangements with FrameStix®
•   Cloud-based software for receiving photos &  les
•  Integrate with your website
•  Wholesale pricing
•  Increase upsell pro ts
Booth #445
Floriexpo Show
May 31-Jun 2
Ft. Lauderdale, FL
Business of Design BY KATIE VINCENT
LESS IS MORE
> The COVID-19 pandemic’s regulations — coupled 
with social and health concerns — created the 
trend of micro weddings, intimate celebrations 
with only family and close friends. The scaled-
down approach really resonated with florist and 
flower farmer Lyndsay Biehl, owner of Wildroot 
Flower Co. in Marietta, Ohio, who discovered that 
with micro weddings, her stress went down, her 
profits went up, and she consistently booked down-flower farmer Lyndsay Biehl, owner of Wildroot 
Flower Co. in Marietta, Ohio, who discovered that 
with micro weddings, her stress went down, her 
profits went up, and she consistently booked down-
to-earth, easygoing brides. In 2022, she dropped 
full-service weddings from her business — and 
she couldn’t be happier. 
natural  selection  “This bride picked us because she 
liked our ‘natural’ style,” Biehl says. “She had no preference 
what flowers we used but requested purple and white and 
originally said ‘no pink whatsoever.’” Biehl convinced her 
client to embrace some blush accents to avoid designs having 
a “polka dot” effect. Here, she used coral dahlias and pale pink 
lisianthus. Design time: 10 to 15 minutes. Estimated wholesale 
cost: $28.50. Cost: $95.00 plus tax. Recipe:  
1 stem of apricot stock, 1 stem of blue Caryopteris,  
2 stems of Dusty Miller, 1 stem of Arena apricot lisianthus,  
2 stems of eucalyptus gunni, 2 stems of eucalyptus1 stem of apricot stock, 1 stem of blue Caryopteris,  
2 stems of Dusty Miller, 1 stem of Arena apricot lisianthus,  
2 stems of eucalyptus gunni, 2 stems of eucalyptus  
‘Silver Dollar’, 1 stem of dahlia ‘Babette’,  
3 stems of Calamagrostis brachytricha,  
3 stems of Queen Red Lime zinnia,  
2 stems of Eryngium , 2 Little  
Lime hydrangeas 
44 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORG“I have my Saturdays back!” Biehl says. Eliminating 
setup not only freed up her personal time but also 
removed a substantial labor cost. She still creates 
large installations, like arbors, but she does so at her 
design studio and has her clients pick it up and set it 
up at the wedding venue. “I was skeptical at first that 
brides would be okay picking up their own flowers, 
but I’ve had no complaints,” she says. Additionally, 
she’s managed to streamline the entire planning 
process by forgoing in-person consultations, which 
have the potential to be drawn out and lead toshe’s managed to streamline the entire planning 
process by forgoing in-person consultations, which 
have the potential to be drawn out and lead to 
ongoing back-and-forth communication. Her website 
directs prospective clients to a questionnaire — 
primarily to gauge their style and color preferences 
— followed by a confirmation email and a 20- to 
30-minute phone call. “It’s pretty cut and dried — not 
much hand holding,” she says. “I basically have a chart 
that shows flowers by color and what season they’re 
available. No one’s requesting specific varieties.”
Without detailed wish lists, Biehl has been able 
to design exclusively with what she grows. “I used 
to hunt down product from multiple wholesalers, 
purchasing more than I needed,” she says. “Seeing 
that line drop from my expenses has been so 
gratifying and great for my profitability.” She also 
supplies flowers to other local florists. “They’re 
priority customers who move large volumes ofthat line drop from my expenses has been so 
gratifying and great for my profitability.” She also 
supplies flowers to other local florists. “They’re 
priority customers who move large volumes of 
product in one sale,” she says. “If they’re happy with 
the flowers and colors we have, we can fulfill orders 
quickly — ideally with about a two-week notice. 
That product will be pre-processed and 100 percent 
usable, so those are dollars back in their pocket.” 
Katie Vincent  is the senior contributing editor  
of Floral Management.
elevated  (Opposite page) Biehl designed this large piece on a gold stand 
so it could easily be moved from the ceremony to the reception site. “She, 
like a lot of micro wedding brides, wanted designs that could be repurposed,” 
she says. Design time: 25 to 30 minutes. Estimated wholesale cost: $89.20. 
Cost: $295 (does not include the stand). Recipe: 2 stems of snapdragon, 
8 stems of Caryopteris, 4 stems of Ammi, 2 stems of Eryngium, 6 stemsCost: $295 (does not include the stand). Recipe: 2 stems of snapdragon, 
8 stems of Caryopteris, 4 stems of Ammi, 2 stems of Eryngium, 6 stems 
of lisianthus, 5 stems of cosmos, 8 stems of eucalyptus gunni, 6 stems of 
eucalyptus, 5 stems of ball dahlia, 2 stems of dinnerplate dahlia, 4 stems of 
Agonis, 6 stems of Calamagrostis brachytricha
  The magazine of the Society of American Florists (SAF) 45New Products BY SHEILA SANTIAGO
for better  or for torte
Brides will stand out with a unique and trendy 
mirror acrylic scripted cake topper. The practical 
design and carefully selected font capture the 
essence of fun and cheer. Koyal Wholesale, 
offers a wide selection of wedding supplies, 
including unique patterns and distinctive designs. 
koyalwholesale.comhappily  tiara  after
Help brides sparkle and shine on their big day 
with a stunning tiara from Mariposa Wedding 
Accessories. Mariposa Wedding Accessories also 
offers an extensive selection of wedding floralHelp brides sparkle and shine on their big day 
with a stunning tiara from Mariposa Wedding 
Accessories. Mariposa Wedding Accessories also 
offers an extensive selection of wedding floral 
and accessory needs, including veils, headpieces, 
jewelry, and sashes. mariposa-wholesale.comspa-lendid  gift
Brides can pamper their wedding party with a luxurious Spa Experience Tin. The tin includes a 
moisturizing buttercream bath truffle, lavender goat’s milk bath tea, a jar of wedding cake shea cream, 
and a “Hint of Mint” lip balm — everything needed for a relaxing spa day. Packaged in a beautiful metal 
tin wrapped with rustic twine and ribbon, this gift is elegant and thoughtful. 1818farms.comPRODUCTS TO CELEBRATE
inflate  the romance
Add a touch of celebration for the bride to be 
with a wedding cake foil balloon. This beautiful 
balloon mixes gold and pink patterns and features 
a “Wedding Wishes” message, making it the 
perfect addition to any wedding décor. Measuringwith a wedding cake foil balloon. This beautiful 
balloon mixes gold and pink patterns and features 
a “Wedding Wishes” message, making it the 
perfect addition to any wedding décor. Measuring 
25 inches high, with a fixed base, it also allows 
for a great table centerpiece or gift display. 
burtonandburton.com 
fluttering  accents  
Looking for the perfect accent for florals, cakes, 
centerpieces and more? These 4-inch glitter 
butterfly floral picks are available in more than 
24 color variations to complement any wedding, 
quinceañera, or birthday party. Create stunning 
designs that will leave a lasting impression. 
cbflowerscrafts.com
Sheila Santiago is the director of 
development for the Society of 
American Florists.
46 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGThat Flower Feeling is a brand created
for the entire floral industry, to promote
an increase in floral consumption in the
United States.
Join your other industry stakeholders fromfor the entire floral industry, to promote
an increase in floral consumption in the
United States.
Join your other industry stakeholders from
all segments in contributing to the growth
of the floral industry by making your
3-year pledge today!
Simply scan the QR code to go to
our funding page, and help us spread
That Flower Feeling to millions
of American consumers!
Join CalFlowers and ship
flowers fresher, faster, and 
more affordably
Exclusive Member Discounts
Visit cafgs.org for details• Up to 73.7% off FedEx Priority Overnight ®  
 & FedEx Standard Overnight ® services
• Up to 39% off FedEx Ground ®services
• More than 70% off standard shipping rates
• Excellent shipping discounts on major 
 U.S Airlines!
TSFA Ad.ai   1   2/26/23   2:41 PMTSFA Ad.ai   1   2/26/23   2:41 PMQuality BY TERRIL A. NELL, PH.D., AAF
BEWARE OF BOTRYTIS 
> Botrytis, the gray mold menace, has 
caused serious losses for all segments 
of the flower industry. The good news?BEWARE OF BOTRYTIS 
> Botrytis, the gray mold menace, has 
caused serious losses for all segments 
of the flower industry. The good news? 
If the industry widely adopts protocols 
based on new research, the entire supply 
chain will benefit — including florists. 
The American Floral Endowment 
(AFE), with the support of 24 national 
and international growers, flower grower 
associations and wholesale florists, 
recently completed a five-year project to 
identify new and more effective control 
and management practices to reduce 
losses from botrytis. In particular, this 
project has identified new grower prac -
tices that help ensure that the flowers 
delivered to florists are free of the mold. 
What Is It?
Botrytis is a fungus  that affects many 
plant species including flowers, fruits 
and vegetables. Flower petals provide 
an excellent food source for the growth 
of spores. The disease is established in 
flower petals and may appear as irregu -and vegetables. Flower petals provide 
an excellent food source for the growth 
of spores. The disease is established in 
flower petals and may appear as irregu -
lar, enlarged, water-soaked or tan spots. 
The disease invades the petal and begins 
to kill cells, leading to fuzzy gray growth 
on the petal surface. Aging flowers are 
particularly susceptible. While botrytis 
cannot be eliminated, it can be controlled 
by minimizing exposure to or killing spores during production, treating the 
flowers with newly identified measures, 
and assuring that conditions following 
harvest do not promote growth.
New Control Approach
Traditional control measures, such as 
commercial fungicides, have become 
less effective because botrytis spores 
have become resistant to them. As a 
result, botrytis problems have become 
more common. Clemson University 
researchers Jim Faust and Melissa 
Muñoz, supported by AFE, found that 
dipping flowers in calcium and otherresult, botrytis problems have become 
more common. Clemson University 
researchers Jim Faust and Melissa 
Muñoz, supported by AFE, found that 
dipping flowers in calcium and other 
biological solutions following harvest 
reduces botrytis infection. In their 
research, flowers were grown and 
treated in Colombia and then shipped to 
Clemson University for botrytis assess -
ment. This study, combined with other 
tests, show that the best control for 
botrytis is an integrated program of syn -
thetic fungicides and biological products 
during crop production, with the flower 
dip following harvest.
Retailer To-Do List 
	■Check the source of your 
flowers. You can reduce botrytis 
problems by asking growers to 
use a program that effectively 
integrates biological control 
products and synthetic fungicides 
to botrytis. Check out AFE’s 
website for written materials and 
videos on controlling botrytis.	■Inspect all arriving flowers 
carefully.  Alert your supplierproducts and synthetic fungicides 
to botrytis. Check out AFE’s 
website for written materials and 
videos on controlling botrytis.	■Inspect all arriving flowers 
carefully.  Alert your supplier 
if your incoming flowers have 
botrytis symptoms. Flowers 
with botrytis will not recover.
	■Remove plastic sleeves and 
protective materials around 
flowers. When flowers processed 
at warm temperatures are 
moved to a cooler, condensation 
forms on the interior surface 
of plastic wrappings and on 
petals. Prevent this moisture 
buildup! Condensation on the 
bud/flower and packaging is 
often enough for the botrytis 
spores to quickly develop. 
	■Avoid spreading botrytis 
spores. Spores can be spread in 
the air, on clippers and knives, 
clothes or on dirty benches 
and design tables. Maintaining 
clean surfaces, sterilizing tools 
and cleaning coolers (every 
one or two months) will help to 
reduce the spread of botrytis.
	■Check your cooler conditions. 
Maintaining proper conditions inclean surfaces, sterilizing tools 
and cleaning coolers (every 
one or two months) will help to 
reduce the spread of botrytis.
	■Check your cooler conditions. 
Maintaining proper conditions in 
the cooler is important. Keep the 
cooler between 34 to 38 F with a 
relative humidity between 75 to 
85 percent. Do not let the cooler 
humidity rise above 85 percent. 
Terril A. Nell, Ph.D., AAF, is the 
research director for the American 
Floral Endowment.WHY DO SOME FLOWERS 
HAVE BOTRYTIS, AND 
SOME DO NOT?
Like it or not, botrytis spores are al -
ways present and will grow if the air is 
above 85 percent humidity, or if pet -
als are wet for eight hours or longer 
while temperatures are between 65 
to 75 F (botrytis is not killed at lower 
storage temperatures but they do not 
grow as rapidly). 
Some types of flowers are more sen -
sitive to botrytis than others. If you 
always see botrytis on some varieties, 
consider using other varieties that are 
more resistant.grow as rapidly). 
Some types of flowers are more sen -
sitive to botrytis than others. If you 
always see botrytis on some varieties, 
consider using other varieties that are 
more resistant. 
48 FLORAL MANAGEMENT | May/June 2023 | WWW.SAFNOW.ORGmyteleﬂ  ora.com  |  1.800.421.2815•  Best-in-class technology – from POS to 
eFlorist and order-driving services
•  100% committed to local ﬂ  orists
•  Leader in ﬂ  oral advertising and promoting 
ﬂ  orists in the media“Teleﬂ  ora has been a trusted and loyal 
business partner to Winston Flowers for 
generations. Teleﬂ  ora’s best-in-class 
eFlorist website and point-of-sale 
technology provide us with tools to 
exceed our customers’ needs.”TED WINSTON 
WINSTON FLOWERS
FLORAL INDUSTRY 
LEADERS CHOOSE TELEFLORA
© 2020 Teleﬂ  ora LLC. All Rights Reserved. TELEFLORA is a registered 
trademark owned by Teleﬂ  ora LLC. FM200409-07
FM200409-07_Trade_Ad_Floral_Mgmt_Ted_Winston_F.indd   1 4/17/20   4:31 PMTO LEARN MORE, VISIT FTDI.COM/NEWFTDtrademark owned by Teleﬂ  ora LLC. FM200409-07
FM200409-07_Trade_Ad_Floral_Mgmt_Ted_Winston_F.indd   1 4/17/20   4:31 PMTO LEARN MORE, VISIT FTDI.COM/NEWFTD
Your business needs are always evolving—and you should  
have flexible technology that can keep up. With Mercury HQ, 
our cloud-based order management system, it’s easy to accept 
orders and run your shop from your personal computer, tablet 
or smartphone. And with new and improved florist websites, 
your shop will shine in the e-commerce space.
TOMORROW’S TECHNOLOGY   
FOR TODAY’S FLORISTSTHE  
NEW FTD
©2022 FTD, LLC